                  The Three Kingdoms and Western Jin
               A history of China in the Third Century AD

Internet edition 2003
 
Rafe de Crespigny

Faculty of Asian Studies, Australian National University NOTE: This
article was originally published in East Asian History [ISSN
1036-6008], The Australian National University, Canberra no. 1 [June
1991], pp. 1-36, & no. 2 [December 1991], pp. 143-164. Internet
publication last revised in November 2003.  The whole work is
copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private
study, research, criticism, or review, as permitted under the
Copyright Act, no part may be reproduced by any process without
written permission. Enquiries should be made to the Faculty of Asian
Studies at the Australian National University.

Note to the Internet edition 2003: This document contains the text of
an article published in two parts in the Canberra journal East Asian
History: Number 1, June 1991, 1-36, and Number 2, December 1991,
143-164. Maps and annotations are included, but not characters. I have
added some references to works in the field published since 1991, but
have not at this stage attempted a comprehensive bibliography. In a
letter of 1994, Professor Fang Beichen of Chengdu University provided
some comments; I am most grateful to him and have made a number of
changes in accordance with his advice.

Note to the original article 1991: This work has been prepared as a
chapter for the second volume of The Cambridge History of China. I
present it here in preliminary form because I believe there is room
for a general survey of the third century, which saw the transition
from a long-unified empire to a comparable period of disunity and
conflict, and because I know that I shall benefit from the comments
and criticisms of others. I emphasise that the piece is designed as a
discussion of events: I refer occasionally to matters of literature
and philosophy, but there are others expert in those fields, and I
have sought only to provide a historical background for their
analysis.

 
Table of contents

    * Part 1: The Formation of the Three Kingdoms (189-220)
          o The successes of Cao Cao
          o The Red Cliffs campaign (208)
          o The struggle for the middle Yangzi
    * Part 2: Rival Empires (220-265)
          o Wu and the south
          o Shu-Han
          o Wei and the Sima family
    * Part 3: The Empire of Western Jin (265-317)
          o The unification of China (265-280)
          o Settlement of the empire (280-290)
          o Empress Jia and the eight princes (290-306)
          o The peoples of the steppe and the collapse of Western Jin
    * Conclusion: Patterns of the Third Century
    * Sources and Common Abbreviations [ pdf file 174 kb]
    * Notes [ pdf file 174 kb]
    * Maps [ pdf large file 786 kb]
          o Map 1 Warlords at the end of Han
          o Map 2 The Decisive Campaigns 219-222
          o Map 3 The Three Kingdoms about 230 AD
          o Map 4 Colonisation in the south 140-280
          o Map 5 The empire of Jin about 280 AD
          o Map 6 Northern China in the early 4th century

PART 1: The Formation of the Three Kingdoms (189-220)

The successes of Cao Cao

It is not often in history that a major change can be dated so
precisely as the fall of the empire of Han. On the evening of 24
September 189 the general Dong Zhuo, camped outside the capital city
of Luoyang, saw flames rise up against the sky. He led his army
forward to deal with the disorders, and at that moment the power of
the imperial government was ended.

When Dong Zhuo entered the capital, he did so without formal
authority, but he faced no legitimate opposition, and his seizure of
power turned the political structure of the state back to its roots.
Despite cosmological and political theories of the time, the essential
factor in government had been the military authority of the emperor.
The founders of the dynasty, Emperor Gao of Former Han and Emperor
Guangwu of Later Han, had gained the throne by victory in civil war,
and their descendants had ruled in succession just because, in the
last resort, their armies would obey their imperial commands. Now,
however, that authority was gone. On 28 September, Dong Zhuo deposed
the young emperor Liu Bian and placed his half-brother Liu Xie,
Emperor Xian, upon the throne. Within a few weeks there was open
rebellion and the whole of eastern China was cut off from the new
government at Luoyang.

The impetus for opposition to Dong Zhuo, however, came as much from
personal ambition as from any desire to restore the power of Han.
Leaders of the rebels in the east included Yuan Shao and Yuan Shu, who
controlled a network of influence based on the high official status of
their family and their wealth of landed property, and men such as Cao
Cao, not so well regarded, but with sufficient resources of family
property to raise his own private army. Many of the regular officials
of the provinces were reluctant to break the peace, but the local
pressure was overwhelming, and those who did not join the rebels were
swiftly eliminated. And there were, of course, numbers of fighting men
and adventurers, some of them with pretensions to an official
position, who took advantage of the growing turmoil to seek power and
profit on their own initiative.

In 191 the army of Sun Jian, under the command of Yuan Shu, drove Dong
Zhuo from Luoyang west to Chang'an, and in 192 Dong Zhuo was
assassinated by his former body-guard Lu Bu. The central government
fell into complete disorder and played no further part in the affairs
of the rest of the empire, and the alliance in the east broke up into
an anarchy of warfare across the whole of the plain.

In this first stage of the wars, there were a multitude of contenders
for success or survival. From his base at Ye city in Ji province, Yuan
Shao extended his power north of the Yellow River, while further
south, between the Yellow River and the Huai River, there was a tense
and vicious conflict between Yuan Shu, Cao Cao, Tao Qian the Governor
of Xu province, Lu Bu from the northwest and Liu Bei, a man of poor
family who yet claimed descent from the rulers of Former Han. Yuan Shu
was driven south of the Huai River in 193, Tao Qian was destroyed in
194, and Liu Bei surrendered in 196. As his power spread, Cao Cao's
army combined family connections, gentry allies, soldiers of fortune
and surrendered rebels, and by 198, when he captured Lu Bu and killed
him, Cao Cao had no further rival in the southern part of the Yellow
plain.

Of those early opponents, Tao Qian was an appointed official who could
claim no strong local support against a determined enemy, while at the
other end of the scale Lu Bu and Liu Bei were soldiers of fortune who
relied for success entirely upon their military prowess and
reputation. They were not regarded as men of good social position,
they did not have notable support among the gentry, and they failed to
attract a substantial body of advisers and administrators to their
service. So their power was brittle, and no match in the longer term
for a competent opponent who could also offer some form of stable
government. More commonly, such a leader without background would
subordinate himself to a man of national authority, and it was for
this reason that Sun Jian, who had obtained a large army in 189 but
who came from an insignificant family of the southeast, accepted Yuan
Shu as his chief and fought thereafter under his orders.

Sun Jian was killed early in the civil war, in a campaign against Liu
Biao the Governor of Jing  province, and in 193 Yuan Shu was driven
south into Yang province. From his new capital at Shouchun in
present-day Anhui, he made some attempt to regain the ground he had
lost north of the Huai River, and in 197 he took title as emperor of a
new dynasty. Yuan Shu's claim, however, was rejected even by his
allies, and every hand turned against him. Abandoned by almost all his
followers, he died in the summer of 199. Though the empire had become
a gigantic battleground, and the emperor himself was a powerless
puppet, the imperial title was still reserved to the house of Liu.

In 196 Emperor Xian made his escape from the squabbling warlords of
Chang'an, and with a combination of luck and imagination Cao Cao took
him under protection and control. Playing the hand far more carefully
than had Dong Zhuo, Cao Cao established the formalities of an imperial
court at present-day Xuchang in Henan, and he justified his actions as
a loyal minister of Han.

In the summer of 200, after months of planning and preparation, Yuan
Shao and Cao Cao met in a long-drawn campaign about the small city of
Guandu, south of the Yellow River near present-day Kaifeng. Cao Cao's
forces were heavily outnumbered, but they held their defence for more
than a month, and then a fortunate raid against the enemy's supply
lines broke the morale of Yuan Shao's forces and drove them in
disorder to the north. Two years later, Yuan Shao died, his sons
quarrelled about the inheritance, and Cao Cao took advantage of the
confusion. In 204 he captured Ye city, and by 207, after a brilliant
campaign beyond the frontier against the non-Chinese Wuhuan, he had
established control over all the Yellow plain.

Cao Cao was a fine general and a remarkable politician, and he has
acquired a legendary status in Chinese tradition. To appreciate the
reality of his achievement, however, we must recognise the pattern of
conflict within which he gained his success.

The ramshackle pattern of military recruitment had considerable effect
upon techniques of warfare and upon the structure of politics for
generations to come. Despite theories and formalities of ranks and
grades, the basic fighting unit was the group which had gathered or
been conscripted about some leader, and each unit was accompanied by a
mass of camp-followers, wives and children, cooks and prostitutes,
peddlers and gamblers, and a few who specialised in care of the sick
and wounded. At the core of command, each chieftain was supported by a
group of companions, close relatives or old friends and comrades, whom
he could rely upon completely and who served as a focus for the mass
of his troops.

In these circumstances, success in combat depended very largely upon
the personal courage of the individual commander, the degree with
which he could encourage his men to follow him, and the ability to
rally them to his standard even after serious defeat. Though accounts
of the time exaggerate the heroism of the leaders, it does appear that
the pattern of battle required a direct attack by small body of men,
who sought to "break the enemy line" and throw the opposing body of
troops into disorder and flight. The officers who could embark on such
an enterprise were certainly brave and physically skilful, but they
were also likely to be violent and egotistical, and they were not
necessarily competent administrators or thoughtful counsellors.

The troops these men commanded were unwieldy and uncertain. As
authority depended primarily upon prestige and personality, no
individual could exercise real control over more than a few hundred or
perhaps a thousand men, and any substantial force, perhaps thirty
thousand men, must be ordered through a long hierarchy of command,
from the leading general to individual units. With limited means of
communication, there were constant problems of discipline and supply,
while such a military mass was extremely difficult to manoeuvre in the
face of battle, where even a minor set-back could produce loss of
morale and swift collapse. And though the question was often ignored,
there was serious danger of disease amongst such a host of men
gathered together. To a considerable degree, armies of that time
carried with them the seeds of their own destruction.

In more general, even philosophical terms, there has been some debate
on the nature of Cao Cao's social or class position, and his
significance as the representative of middle and lower land-holders
and gentry as opposed to the members of old and powerful clans
represented and championed by Yuan Shao. Indeed it is true that the
perception of social status as a source of authority was sometimes
more important than practical matters, for the dominance of gentry
families in the political society of Later Han had brought a general
expectation that local and national authority was reserved to men of
lineage. On the other hand, though family background could determine
whether a man had sufficient status to maintain an independent command
and attract useful administrative support, it is too simplistic to
base analysis purely on questions of class conflict. Many
contemporaries regarded the ambitions of the Yuan as excessive and
deluded, and Cao Cao was, sensibly, more cautious. The Cao and their
kinsmen of the Xiahou family were parvenus compared to great lineages
such as the Yuan, but Cao Cao's father had been Grand Commandant, most
senior position in the imperial administration, Cao Cao's first
recruitment of troops was based upon family resources, and he had
sufficient standing to seek and achieve an independent position.

Once he had entered the contest, Cao Cao's great achievement was to
gain and hold the loyalty of a vast number of different commanders and
their followers, and to maintain his disparate forces as a coherent
military power. This was a matter of personal ability, and when he had
established his authority south of the Yellow River it was upon the
basis of that regional command that he mounted his opposition to Yuan
Shao and other rivals. In the political and military manoeuvring which
culminated in the decisive battle of Guandu, there was discussion of
Yuan Shao's claim to great family and of Cao Cao's talent as a leader,
but this was rather in the nature of propaganda than the echoes of a
Marxist confrontation: the critical conflict was between the warlord
north of the Yellow River and his rival to the south, and Cao Cao
gained the victory because he organised his resources more effectively
and commanded his army with greater skill.

By the end of 207, after his conquest of the territory formerly
controlled by Yuan Shao, Cao Cao had established government over half
the population of the empire, and he controlled the heart-land of
China. From this central position, he was faced by a scattering of
opponents, none of them in close alliance and each one weaker than
himself. In the northeast, the southern part of Manchuria, Gongsun Du
had established a separatist state, and he was succeeded by his son
Gongsun Kang in 204. North across the frontier and in the region of
present-day Shanxi, imperial control had largely given way to a medley
of non-Chinese tribes, in which the remnants of the Xiongnu state
struggled for survival against the erratic power of the Xianbi. In
Liang 2D province, about present-day Gansu, rebellion which had broken
out in 184 had been restricted to that territory, but the confusion
had been made worse by the collapse of government at Chang'an after
the death of Dong Zhuo. To the west, in present-day Sichuan, Liu Yan,
the Governor of Yi province appointed in 188, had been succeeded by
his son Liu Zhang in 194. Immediately to the north of Liu Zhang's
territory, Hanzhong commandery on the upper Han River in present-day
southern Shenxi was under the theocratic government of Zhang Lu,
leader of the Five Pecks of Rice sect, recognised by the present-day
Taoist church as third patriarch of the Celestial Masters.

Immediately after his campaign to settle the north, however, Cao Cao
turned his attention southwards against Liu Biao, Governor of Jing
province, and the young warlord Sun Quan who controlled the lower
course of the Yangzi.

At the beginning of Later Han, the critical phase of civil war had
been the struggle for command of the Yellow plain, and when the future
Emperor Guangwu had gained that territory it was only a matter of time
before the rival warlords on the periphery fell under his control. In
208, as Cao Cao embarked on his campaign to the south, it was
generally expected, even by his opponents, that the same pattern would
be followed once again. By a combination of changed circumstances and
the fortunes of war, however, the unity of the empire was not restored
so quickly, and it was indeed very long delayed.

 

The Red Cliffs campaign (208)

We have noticed Sun Jian, former Grand Administrator of Changsha and
then general in the service of Yuan Shu. After his death on campaign
against Liu Biao, his forces were largely taken over by Yuan Shu but a
few years later, about 194, his son Sun Ce, then aged eighteen, took
service with Yuan Shu. He was given command of some of the soldiers
who had followed his father, and was sent to join operations south of
the Yangzi.

The Sun came from Wu commandery in present-day Zhejiang, but they were
not a leading family of that region, and Sun Jian had made his career
as a fighting soldier. In similar fashion, Sun Ce established his
position in the southeast essentially through his own remarkable
military skill. By 198, at the age of twenty-three, he had declared
independence from his former patron Yuan Shu, now a usurping emperor,
and he held control of Danyang, Wu and Kuaiji commanderies, a stretch
of territory from present-day Nanjing past Hangzhou Bay, including
some outposts on the coast of Fujian. From this base Sun Ce extended
his power westwards, and by 200 he had taken Yuzhang commandery about
the present-day Poyang Lake in Jiangxi, and Lujiang commandery north
of the Yangzi.

In this series of campaigns, Sun Ce had to deal not only with the
semi-regular troops of rival administrators, but also with bandits,
with local self-defence groups, and with powerful clans which had
gathered their own private armies. In many respects the warfare was as
much a matter of local rivalry as a formal struggle for power, and in
200, soon after his conquest of Poyang, Sun Ce was ambushed and
assassinated by former retainers of a defeated local family from Wu.

Sun Ce was succeeded by his younger brother Sun Quan, at that time
eighteen years old. The warlord state, however, was sufficiently well
established that it survived the immediate crisis, and Sun Quan
swiftly established his authority in the territory his brother had
left him. By 203 he was expanding further to the west, and early in
208 he destroyed Huang Zu, the subordinate commander of Liu Biao who
controlled the territory about present-day Wuhan on the middle Yangzi.

On the eve of Cao Cao's campaign against the south, therefore, Sun
Quan held a curve of territory from Hangzhou Bay to the Yangzi estuary
and west towards Wuhan. He had, however, no strong position north
towards the Huai River, and much of the hill country in the south was
inaccessible, inhabited by the non-Chinese Yue people and by refugees
from official levies or the disturbances of war. On the other hand,
whereas Sun Quan's power was only a fraction of that which Cao Cao
could mobilise, his navy on the Yangzi was experienced and effective,
and had established a local superiority.

Cao Cao's first opponent was Liu Biao, Governor of Jing province. Liu
Biao had been appointed to that position by the Han government under
control of Dong Zhuo, but after the early 190s, when he had repelled
the attack of Sun Jian and Yuan Shu, he played no substantial role in
the civil war of the north. The territory formally under his control
extended south from his capital at present-day Xiangfan down the Han
River to the Yangzi, and then south again up the valley of the Xiang
River, but in practice his authority beyond the Yangzi was tenuous,
while his eastern flank was under threat from Sun Quan.

In the autumn of 208, moreover, Liu Biao died. Through political
manoeuvring, the succession was taken by his younger son Liu Zong, and
the elder Liu Qi was left discontented and rebellious. As Cao Cao
approached, Liu Zong's supporters urged him to surrender, and indeed
he had no alternative. Cao Cao took over the province, made his own
appointments to the local government, and gathered many of the leading
officials and scholars at Liu Biao's court into his own service.

There was, however, a party of opposition, to some degree centred
about Liu Qi, but inspired primarily by Liu Bei, who had fled from the
north some years before. Liu Bei attempted to rally the dissidents and
establish a line of defence on the Yangzi. Chased, caught and heavily
defeated by Cao Cao, however, he turned to seek support from Sun Quan.

It was not an easy decision. Liu Bei and Liu Qi were in exile and
retreat, and although Liu Bei's lieutenant Guan Yu had collected much
of the Jing province fleet from the Han River, Cao Cao had control of
the naval base at Jiangling on the Yangzi. As he brought his army and
his new fleet eastwards in pursuit, he also sent messengers calling
Sun Quan to surrender.

Sun Quan was uncertain of his best course of action, and there was
considerable debate at his headquarters. He decided, however, to send
troops forward under the command of Zhou Yu, to join Liu Bei and Liu
Qi, and to test Cao Cao's strength. If their defence should be
unsuccessful, he could expect to withdraw most of his men, and he
would still have a reserve army with which to negotiate terms.

The allies met Cao Cao's forces at the Red Cliffs, on the Yangzi
between present-day Wuhan and Yueyang, and for a few days the two
groups faced one another across the river. The men from the north had
already taken part in a long campaign with several forced marches,
they were not used to the southern waterways and marshlands, and we
are told there was sickness in the camp. Some of the army and all of
the fleet had formerly served Liu Biao, and many must have been
undecided about their new master. For his own part, Cao Cao probably
regarded the operation as a reconnaissance in force: if he was
successful in defeating the allies and driving them to separate
surrenders, so much the better if not, he could withdraw and look for
another occasion in the future.

Cao Cao's first attack was driven back and then the wind changed
against him and Zhou Yu sent in an attack with fire-ships. In the
technology of warfare of that time, fire was a common weapon, and when
used in the right circumstance it could create large-scale
destruction. Whatever preparations Cao Cao may have made against the
threat, he was compelled to abandon his position and retreat, and the
allies enhanced their victory with tales of slaughter. The battle at
the Red Cliffs has become one of the most celebrated of Chinese
history, it is the theme of several plays and poems, and the
centre-piece of the great historical novel Romance of the Three
Kingdoms.

It is very likely that the account of Cao Cao's defeat has been
exaggerated, and literary tradition has embellished the story out of
all proportion, but later events justify the engagement as one of the
decisive battles of Chinese history. As Cao Cao retreated, he left
garrisons behind him, but in the following year Zhou Yu's army
captured Jiangling, and the southerners thereafter faced no serious
threat to their naval control of the Yangzi. Cao Cao and his
successors made several attempts to break the river defences, but they
could not match the strategic position or the tactical skills of their
enemies. Neither side may have realised it at the time, but the Red
Cliffs campaign was the last chance for many years to re-unite the
empire, for it was control of the middle Yangzi which meant the
difference between survival and surrender in the south.

The struggle for the middle Yangzi

With the fall of Jiangling, Cao Cao's territory in the south was
restricted to the Han River, with Xiangyang as his centre of defence.
Sun Quan, as chief of the allies, naturally expected to profit from
their success, but while his attention was devoted to his own position
in the east, with an unsuccessful sortie northwards across the Huai
River, Liu Bei and his chief adviser Zhuge Liang seized the
commanderies south of the Yangzi, and established a dominant position
in the southern part of Jing province. In 210, Zhou Yu died, and Sun
Quan had no one of comparable authority to take his place. He was
compelled to transfer the territory of Jiangling to Liu Bei, and he
retained only the eastern region from Wuhan to the Dongting Lake.

In 211, Cao Cao turned to the northwest, broke the back of a warlord
coalition in the Wei River valley, and re-occupied the territory about
Chang'an. Faced with this threat to his north, Liu Zhang invited Liu
Bei to come to his aid in Yi province and assist him, first against
Zhang Lu in Hanzhong and then in due course against Cao Cao. Liu Bei
accepted the invitation, but one year later he forced a quarrel with
Liu Zhang and turned against him. In 214 Liu Zhang was compelled to
surrender, and Liu Bei took over his territory.

During this period Cao Cao and Sun Quan had engaged one another in the
southeast, but Cao Cao's forces had no success against Sun Quan's
position on the Yangzi, while Sun Quan was unable to break the line of
the Huai River. In particular, Cao Cao's administrator Liu Fu
established agricultural garrisons about Shouchun and Hefei, and the
settled peasant militia gave a long-term stability to the defence of
the region. Further south, in campaigns against the non-Chinese people
and the refugees or renegades of present-day southern Zhejiang and
Fujian, Sun Quan's officers, notably He Qi and Lu Xun, began a process
of conquest and colonisation which increased the territory of the
state and added considerably to the human resources that could be
taxed and recruited for corvee service and war.

When Liu Bei seized power in Yi province, however, Sun Quan turned his
attention again to the middle Yangzi, and demanded a greater share of
the territory in the basin of the Xiang River. Apart from the
resentment with which he had watched his erstwhile weaker ally gain
territory in Sichuan, it was clear that the resources he currently
commanded were not sufficient to maintain long-term defence against
the north. In 215 Sun Quan's officer Lu Meng was sent to seize the
southern commanderies of Jing province. Liu Bei's general Guan Yu
brought an army in counter-attack, and the rival warlords agreed on a
new settlement, establishing the Xiang River as the boundary between
them. Both were concerned by the threat from the north, and Liu Bei
was also distracted by the situation in Yi province, where Cao Cao's
attack from Chang'an across the Qin Ling range divide compelled the
surrender of Zhang Lu in Hanzhong, and opened the way for a direct
attack on Liu Bei.

For the time being, however, Cao Cao was chiefly concerned with the
organisation of the territory now under his control, with the
suppression of some internal plots against his authority, and with
consolidation of his power as the dominant figure at the refugee court
of Han. Imperial Chancellor since 208, in 214 he received the title
Duke of Wei, and in 217 he became King of Wei and appointed his eldest
son Cao Pi as Heir. Cao Cao's major military activity in this period
was one more attack against Sun Quan's position on the lower Yangzi,
but although he compelled Sun Quan to make formal surrender and
acknowledge him as king, the diplomatic coup had no effect upon the
military relationship of the two sides nor upon Sun Quan's freedom of
action. In that year, moreover, a major outbreak of plague, which may
have begun among the armies on the Yangzi, also attacked the court and
took many of the leading scholars of the day.

For the immediate political future of China, the events of 219 were
critical. At the beginning of that year, after a long campaign of
stalemate, Liu Bei defeated and killed Cao Cao's general Xiahou Yuan
in Hanzhong. Cao Cao brought reinforcements in an attempt to rectify
the damage, but he could not regain the territory, and he was
compelled to retreat across the Qin Ling divide. So Liu Bei's borders
were secured against the north, and in celebration of the victory he
proclaimed himself King of Hanzhong.

To the east, the enemies of Wei sought to take advantage of Cao Cao's
misfortune in Hanzhong. Sun Quan made another unsuccessful attack
against Hefei, but Guan Yu on the middle Yangzi presented a far more
serious danger. From his base at Jiangling, he attacked up the line of
the Han River, and he was fortunate to encounter heavy summer rains
and flooding. One of Cao Cao's armies, caught in the open, was washed
away, and Guan Yu brought his ships to the walls of Fan city, at
present-day Xiangfan, last obstacle to an advance north into Nanyang
and the heart of Cao Cao's power. The garrison in Fan city was
isolated and outnumbered, and their fortifications were eroded by
water, but they held out for three months, and then Guan Yu himself
was attacked and destroyed.

Until this time, despite the incident of 214, Sun Quan and his chief
commander in Jing province, Lu Su, had agreed their best policy was to
maintain the alliance with Liu Bei rather than face Cao Cao alone. Sun
Quan, however, was not satisfied with the territory he had acquired,
and he was concerned that his nominal ally in the west might soon
become as much of a threat as his enemy in the north. When Lu Su died
in 217, Sun Quan appointed Lu Meng, who had served as a personal agent
for him in the past, to take his place, and although they continued to
speak fair to Guan Yu, the Sun group was looking for some opportunity
to act against him.

In the autumn of 219, as Guan Yu was committed to the attack up the
Han River and the siege of Fan city, Lu Meng prepared a secret
invasion and struck westwards along the Yangzi against Jiangling. The
surprise was complete, Guan Yu's position collapsed in ruins, he
himself was killed and the greater part of his army surrendered. Cao
Cao's position in the Han valley was restored, and Sun Quan held all
the territory east of the Yangzi gorges.

At the beginning of the following year, 220, Cao Cao died at the age
of sixty-six sui, and he was succeeded by his son Cao Pi. In the
winter, on 11 December 220 by Western reckoning, the new ruler of Wei
received the abdication of the last emperor of Han and proclaimed his
own accession to the Mandate. Six months later, on 15 May 221, Liu Bei
in Sichuan made a rival claim as emperor of the continuing house of
Han: from the chief commandery of that province, his dynasty is
generally known as Shu-Han.

For the time being, Sun Quan accepted the continued suzerainty of Wei
and recognised Cao Pi's new honour. In exchange he received
enfeoffment as King of Wu, but his chief concern was to hold the
northern state in benevolent neutrality while he sought to deal with
the inevitable attack from Liu Bei, seeking revenge for the
destruction of Guan Yu and reconquest of the territory he had lost in
Jing province. In this, Sun Quan was successful, for Cao Pi was new to
power and to the usurping title, and could not afford to turn too
ostentatiously against his own feudatory.

The attack from Shu against Wu came at the end of 221, and in the
spring of 222 Liu Bei arrived to take command of operations. Lu Meng,
Sun Quan's commander against Guan Yu, had been ill at the time of that
campaign and died soon afterwards, and Sun Quan appointed his
son-in-law and close confidant Lu Xun, a man of good gentry and
official family, to take responsibility for the defence of the west.
Against the advice of his subordinates, Lu Xun waited until Liu Bei
was fully committed along the Yangzi below the Yangzi Gorges, but in
the sixth Chinese month, at the end of the summer, he made a series of
attacks with fire against the flank of Liu Bei's extended positions,
and the army of Shu-Han was broken. Liu Bei made his escape to Bodi
"White Emperor" city, near present-day Fengjie in Sichuan, and he died
there in the following year.

After the destruction of Guan Yu in 219, the defeat of Liu Bei in 222
confirmed Sun Quan's control of Jing province, and Sun Quan wasted
little time in reneging on his fealty to Wei. He failed to send the
hostages he had promised, and when Cao Pi came south to enforce the
pledge Sun Quan's armies defied him with success on both the middle
and the lower Yangzi. As sign of his independence, Sun Quan announced
his own reign-title, and in the winter of that year, the beginning of
223, completing a brilliant series of diplomatic manoeuvres, he
negotiated peace and friendship with the government of Liu Bei.

In military terms, the division of the empire of Han between three
rival states was complete. There were individual warlords and rulers
on the perimeters of the former empire, but the essential boundaries
had been drawn. In the west, the victory of Liu Bei in Hanzhong had
brought the upper Han valley under his control, and set the lines of
battle in that area along the Qin Ling range divide, south of the
valley of the Wei River. On the middle Yangzi, Jing province of Han,
the major possibilities of manoeuvre were ended: Shu-Han was
restricted to the west of the Yangzi Gorges while Wei and Wu shared a
hostile, but largely static, frontier about the lower Han River. In
the southeast, Cao Cao's establishment of agricultural garrisons, and
the consistent failure of Sun Quan's sorties against Hefei and
Shouchun, confirmed the grasp of Wei along the Huai, but Sun Quan's
naval power on the Yangzi was never seriously threatened, and between
the two lines of defence there stretched a desolate no-man's land.

 
PART 2: Rival Empires (220-265)

Hitherto, we have considered the division of Han largely in terms of
the military geography which determined the frontiers of the three
successor states. We must appreciate, however, that the very existence
of these three "kingdoms" was in many respects an unexpected
development. In former times, the brief interludes of civil war after
the end of Qin and the fall of Wang Mang had been followed by swift
reconstruction of a new government for the whole of China, and though
the second century of Later Han had seen much discussion concerning
the Mandate of Heaven, it had been generally accepted that the house
of Liu should be revived or replaced, not that its inheritance would
be divided. In many respects, the most interesting question about the
end of Han is not why the dynasty fell, but why the unified empire was
not restored. Any full answer to this question requires more than
simple discussion of the chances of politics and war. We must consider
the nature of the states which emerged from the ruin of Han.

Wu and the south

At the beginning of the first century AD, during the civil war which
followed the fall of Wang Mang, the rulers of the south had offered no
substantial resistance to the victor in the north, and at the end of
the second century, during the time of civil war which followed the
fall of Han, Sun Ce owed his initial success to the natural defences
of the river and the weakness of his immediate northern neighbour Yuan
Shu. By the time of the Red Cliffs campaign, however, the state of Sun
Quan was strong enough to hold off a direct attack from the north.

The territory then controlled by Sun Quan - the commanderies of
Yuzhang, Danyang, Wu and Kuaiji - had contained less than two million
people at the end of Former Han, but in the middle of the second
century AD their number was assessed at more than three million. This
increase of Chinese population south of the Yangzi was a critical
factor in the division of the empire after the fall of the Han
dynasty, for these human resources, under competent warlord government
in that strategic situation, proved sufficient for survival.

The growth of population in this region was part of a general trend
during Han, and the demographic change may be traced in census records
preserved from the beginning of the first century and the middle of
the second century AD. At the time of the census recorded in the
treatises of Hou Han shu, the registered population of the empire was
a little less than fifty million individuals. Of this total, the
southern parts of Jing province and Yang province provinces, later
controlled by Wu, contained some seven million, and Jiao province in
the far south had perhaps one and a half million. Numbers were
affected by changes on the frontiers, by the toll of civil war and by
migration from one region to another, but on the basis of those Later
Han records the population of the territory of Wu was one-sixth of the
former empire; the northern state of Wei could claim four times that
number - two-thirds of the old empire.

In this situation, though Sun Quan's state had based its early success
on the demographic changes of the Later Han period, its survival
depended on an energetic development of the territory and the people
under its control. This consideration gave urgency to the expansion
into Jing province, culminating in the destruction of Guan Yu in 219
and the successful defence against Liu Bei in 222, while at the same
time, the government of Wu extended its influence into the far south.

Jiao province of Later Han occupied present-day Guangdong and Guangxi,
together with the Red River delta and the coast of Vietnam as far
south as Hue It was first brought under the control of China by the
conquests of the First Emperor of Qin at the end of the third century
BC, but the fall of Qin allowed the emigre Zhao Tuo to establish his
independent state. The province was reconquered by the armies of
Emperor Wu of Former Han at the end of the second century BC, and
Emperor Guangwu's general Ma Yuan restored the authority of Later Han,
but growing weakness in the central government during the second
century had seen a number of local disorders and permitted the
development of considerable local control. Towards the end of the
century, Shi Xie, leader of a family of Chinese descent, established a
personal hegemony through all the region. His capital, Longbian near
present-day Hanoi, was a major trading centre, Shi Xie was admired for
his authority and his scholarship, the splendour of his court was
celebrated, and it became a place of refuge from the warfare of
central China.

For several years, the leaders in the north had other things to occupy
them. After 200, however, Shi Xie appears to have relinquished close
control of the eastern part of the province, present-day Guangdong,
and there was some conflict between Cao Cao, now dominant in the
north, and Liu Biao of Jing province. Each party sent nominees for
positions of local authority, and Cao Cao allied himself directly with
Shi Xie.

In 210, after the death of Liu Biao and the defeat of Cao Cao at the
Red Cliffs, Sun Quan appointed his officer Bu Zhi as Governor. From
his base at Panyu, present-day Guangzhou/Canton, Bu Zhi established
relations with Shi Xie, and Shi Xie sent tribute and hostages to Sun
Quan. Now more than seventy years old, he was evidently content with a
limited, if profitable, role in the Red River delta. Certainly, though
Vietnamese tradition records him as "King Si", he appears to have made
no attempt to emulate the political achievement of Zhao Tuo and the
separate state of Nanyue four centuries earlier.

In 220, Bu Zhi was succeeded by Lu Dai, who confirmed the position in
Nanhai and Cangwu commanderies, and extended his influence over
present-day Guangdong and Guangxi. When Shi Xie died in 226, Lu Dai
was ready to remove the last vestiges of his power. Pressing against
the formal position of the Shi clan, he forced a quarrel and arrived
at the Red River with an army and a fleet. When the sons of Shi Xie
surrendered, Lu Dai had them executed and sent their heads to Sun
Quan. His authority was confirmed along all the southern shore as far
as present-day Cambodia, the sea trade into southeast Asia was
peacefully maintained, and the prosperity of the Shi family at the
entrepot in northern Vietnam was now continued to the advantage of Wu.

With the acquisition of this territory in the far south, Sun Quan
obtained a source of notable wealth, and secured his frontiers to the
west and north. When Liu Bei died in 223, the government in Shu-Han,
now controlled by the regent Zhuge Liang, confirmed the arrangement of
peace and alliance, and though. Cao Pi made several attacks on the
line of the Yangzi, he was compelled each time to withdraw. In 226 Cao
Pi died, and chief military attention shifted northwest to the
frontier against Shu-Han along the Wei River valley in present-day
Shenxi. In this period of stability and prosperity, on 23 June 229,
Sun Quan assumed the imperial title for himself.

In the context of traditional Chinese history, the claim is an
eccentric one. The Cao family could assert that they held the greater
part of the old empire, and their succession was legitimated by the
abdication of Emperor Xian, while Liu Bei in the southwest claimed to
represent the true imperial clan. Sun Quan had no such justification.
His territory was on the fringes of the empire, and he had earlier
accepted his title as king of Wu, and his calendar, from the usurping
Wei. Sun Quan based his claim upon two predications: that the imperial
position, vacated by Han, had not been filled by any worthy successor
and that his own accession was justified by the virtue of his
government, in particular by his concern for the people. He dismissed
the claims of Wei by describing the Cao family as criminal usurpers,
and without specific reference to the claim of Liu Bei, he stated
simply that the fortunes of Han were ended, and the claim to
succession had thus become irrelevant.

No traditional historian has accepted Sun Quan's claim to the Mandate
of Heaven. Much of the formal argument is based upon the incongruity
of the regnal calendar, overlapping with Wei at the beginning and with
Jin at the end, but it is, in any case, difficult to regard the
imperial pretensions of Wu as very much more than a facade. The
ministers and generals of Sun Quan were given titles from the official
hierarchy of Han, and his capital became a centre of culture and
wealth, but the essential structure of government was based upon an
alliance of powerful local families under the hegemony of the Sun
clan, and civilian authority was subordinated very closely to military
power.

Sun Quan did attempt to expand his empire beyond his immediate
territory. He received emissaries from Funan and other countries of
the south, he re-established a Chinese presence on Hainan island, he
sent an expedition to Taiwan, and possibly also to the Ryukyus, and he
sought to establish alliance with the Gongsun warlords of Liaodong in
southern Manchuria. None of these initiatives, however, achieved real
success, and the later military history of Wu was not impressive.

Despite several attempts, the armies of Wu were unable to break the
defences of Wei along the Huai River. There were two occasions, in 255
and 257, when the city of Shouchun was seized by rebels against the
political dominance of the Sima family in Wei, but the southerners
could provide no useful assistance, and in each case the city was
recaptured and the northern position was confirmed.

For the most part, the strategy of Wu was defensive, with garrisons
and naval bases along the line of the Yangzi. After some indecision,
Sun Quan established his capital at Jianye, present-day Nanjing, which
provided a centre for control of the lower Yangzi. Defence of the
middle Yangzi and the lower Han River was based on the new city of
Wuchang, downstream from the present metropolis of Wuhan, with a
military government of wide independent power. For the most part, the
traditional Han hierarchy of provinces, commanderies and counties was
adequate for local administration, but on the frontier territory with
Wei and Shu-Han there were also Area Commanders (dudu) to maintain
defence along the Yangzi.

After a government of more than fifty years, Sun Quan died in 252. His
long reign provided a welcome stability, but it also brought
difficulties for his successors and misfortune on his death. His
eldest son and Heir Apparent, Sun Deng, had died in 241. The next
surviving son, Sun He, was appointed to replace him, but that
candidacy was bedevilled by factional feuding. In 250 Sun He was
deposed, and the elderly Sun Quan was persuaded to pass the succession
to his youngest son, the seven-year-old Sun Liang, under the
guardianship of Zhuge Ke.

This was a recipe for further intrigue and instability. In 253,
eighteen months after the death of Sun Quan, and following a
disastrous attack against Hefei, Zhuge Ke was assassinated by orders
of Sun Liang under the influence of Sun Jun, a distant cadet of the
imperial family. When Sun Jun died three years later, his cousin Sun
Lin succeeded to the dominant position at court. In 258 Sun Liang, now
in his mid teens, sought to rid himself of the over-powerful minister,
but he was dethroned and replaced by Sun Xiu, sixth son of Sun Quan
and some twenty-two years old. A few months later, Sun Xiu arranged a
successful coup against Sun Lin and took power himself.

The government of Sun Xiu was not particularly effective, and his
death in 264 came just at the time the state of Shu-Han surrendered to
Wei. In that period of emergency, Sun Hao, son of the former Heir
Apparent Sun He and aged in his early twenties, was chosen as an adult
ruler who might restore the fortunes and energies of the state. He
achieved, however, only limited success, and in 280 he was compelled
to surrender to the Jin state of the Sima family, which had taken over
from Wei and which brought overwhelming force against him. At the time
of the surrender, the population of Wu was reported as 523,000
households, 2,300,000 individuals, 32,000 officials, and 230,000 men
under arms.

Overall, the history of Wu may be divided into two periods. At first,
under Sun Ce and the younger Sun Quan, it was an energetic and
aggressive state, commanded by men of military skill and achievement.
Those officers who came from outside the ranks of the local gentry,
however, depended closely upon the central government and were seldom
able to establish an independent position in the society of the south.
As the opportunities for expansion ended in the 220s, and the chances
of politics and personality took their toll of the fortunes of the
families of these early leaders, local clans and their retainers came
to dominance.

Apart from personal rivalries, therefore, the faction conflicts of the
central government reflect the transfer of power from the original
leaders of the warlord enterprise to the established local families.
Within the palace, cadet branches of the Sun clan contended for
influence, but just as the authority of the ruler was limited by the
rivalry and conflict of the great clans at the capital, so the central
government had limited authority in the daily affairs of the
provinces.

In 253, following the death of Sun Quan, the general Deng Ai in Wei
observed that the great families of Wu, relying upon their military
strength and their retainers, held the essential power of the state.
Those families of the southeast which supported Sun Ce and Sun Quan in
the early years had gained at the expense of their local rivals, and
with the passage of time, they secured their positions as local
magnates. They could be kept under control by the threat of force and
by a system of internal hostages, but they were not easily overthrown
by the chances of politics.

At the basic level, moreover, the government of Wu, recorded by the
histories in terms of generals and ministers and intrigue at court,
relied upon a broad class of village and county gentry, who might
accept provincial office in one commandery or another, but who had
small interest or concern with the politics of the capital. From this
point of view, the same pattern was maintained as in the last years of
Later Han: essential dues were paid to the imperial government, but
the details of its activities were largely irrelevant to local power,
influence and survival.

In its later years, therefore, the state of Wu was no longer an
ambitious warlord enterprise, but a group of magnates concerned to
maintain their wealth and authority. Faced with such a collection of
family interests, operating at every level, the Sun rulers were never
able to establish strong instruments for the control and development
of agriculture and the machinery of war, with which they might compete
efficiently against their rivals. In the end, though the government of
Wu held power through its past military success, it failed to mobilise
its resources to the full and it lacked authority against local
interests within the state.

One achievement, however, was of great importance for the future. We
have noted how the increased population of the south during Han
provided opportunity for the first establishment of the separate
state. From this base, the rulers of Wu sought to increase the numbers
of people and the amount of farmland under their control. In order to
do so, they pressed constantly against the open territory to the
south, to extract manpower and taxation from the isolated groups of
non-Chinese native people and Chinese refugees who had settled earlier
beyond the reach of the government. As each advance was made, the
people were registered as citizens and subjects, and their human and
economic resources became available for further expansion against
their neighbours or for defence against the north. So the expansion
and maintenance of the state of Wu were linked in a policy of warfare
and colonisation.

It is difficult to assess the speed of this process. In the very
earliest years of the state, He Qi extended authority from the
isolated coastal counties by present-day Fuzhou up the valleys of the
Min River into present-day Jiangxi and southern Zhejiang, and
subsequent campaigns confirmed control south of the Huang Shan
mountains. In 234, a final assault was launched against the hills
people of Danyang, and this operation, commanded by Zhuge Ke, was a
consolidation of Chinese authority. The process, however, continued
elsewhere, sometimes by officially sponsored campaigns, regularly by
small-scale but consistent local aggression, a steady pressure backed
up where necessary by official military force.

One method of assessing the colonisation and conquests of the state of
Wu in the southeast is by comparison of the counties listed at the
time of the census of Later Han, about 140, with those which appear in
the list of the Treatise of Geography of Jin shu, compiled soon after
the conquest of Wu in 280. The Jin dynasty figures for population,
based upon a taxation list, cannot be compared with those of Han,
which represent a full census, but the existence of a county must
indicate a real Chinese presence.

On this comparison, the expansion of authority in the southeast is
remarkable. By 280, within the territory of Wu from the south of the
Yangzi to the north of Vietnam, the number of counties had doubled
since the time of Later Han, from 160 to 322, and they were spread
across territories where no such establishment had been seen before.
The frontier had been transformed, and there were newly confirmed
settlements in present-day southern Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Fujian.
Though the initiative for expansion had arisen from the needs of the
state of Wu, the achievement came eventually to benefit the empire of
Jin: driven from the north at the beginning of the fourth century AD,
the emigre court found refuge and security in the lands which had been
developed by Wu.

Shu-Han

If the state of Wu was based upon the military achievement of one
local family and its supporters, the claimant empire of Shu-Han in the
west was the work of an itinerant warlord entrepreneur, and the
soldiers of fortune who accepted his leadership.

The history of Shu-Han, and particularly that of the founder Liu Bei
and his chief minister Zhuge Liang, has been considerably distorted by
the romantic tradition which presents Liu Bei as a hero of chivalry
and Zhuge Liang as a master of warfare and magic. While Cao Cao is
described as the powerful, proud and arrogant usurper of the imperial
mandate, and the men of Wu are often ineffectual and self-seeking,
sometimes treacherous, the government of Shu-Han is lauded as the true
successor of the fallen empire and the centre of wisdom, courage and
loyalty.

It is possible to trace elements of such a cycle of stories to the
Tang period and earlier, but it was well developed in Song and Yuan,
with a great number of dramas in the traditional repertoire, and it
came to full flower with the historical novel Romance of the Three
Kingdoms [Sanguo yanyi] during Ming. The bias in favour of Shu-Han may
also be found in the comments of the great philosopher Zhu Xi
(1130-1200) on "legitimate succession", while the concept of a "true"
government, still maintained on Chinese soil but exiled from the
traditional centre of power, found popularity not only in Zhu Xi's
dynasty of Southern Song, but also in the modern Republic of China on
Taiwan.

Despite this romantic tradition, and although some modern scholars
have sought to use its material as a guide to the history of the Three
Kingdoms, it is important to realise that the novel and the dramas are
not independent sources of information. They are frequently and
sometimes deliberately mistaken in what they recount, and they are of
no more value for the study of the time they purport to describe than
are the plays of Shakespeare for the history of England, Scotland or
Rome.

On the other hand, though we must ignore the brilliant falsehoods of
romance, the history of Shu-Han is still remarkable.

The founder of the state, Liu Bei, came from Zhuo commandery near
present-day Beijing, and he acquired his first reputation in warfare
against the Yellow Turban rebellion of 184. When civil war broke out
in the 190s he served or allied himself with one warlord after
another, and he held short-lived power over substantial territory in
north China. In 200, however, at the time of the campaign between Cao
Cao and Yuan Shao about Guandu, Liu Bei was thoroughly defeated by Cao
Cao's forces and fled to take refuge with Liu Biao.

For the next several years, Liu Bei had no notable role in the
politics of the empire. He did, however, maintain the followers who
had accompanied him into exile, he developed connections among Liu
Biao's own entourage, and it was at this time he met Zhuge Liang. In
208, when Liu Biao died and Cao Cao came south, Liu Bei established
himself as the chief of those who sought to oppose the surrender. He
was briskly defeated, but fled to seek support from Sun Quan, and
after the victory at the Red Cliffs he established a position in the
southern part of Jing province.

In 211 Liu Bei was invited into Yi province by the Governor, Liu
Zhang, to assist him in dealing with enemies on his northern borders.
Liu Zhang, not a man of military distinction or great personal
authority, sought the borrowed authority and the experienced army of
his nominal "cousin", but a strong party at Liu Zhang's court was
prepared to welcome Liu Bei as ruler of the whole territory. Liu Bei
agreed to their proposal, and little more than a year after his
arrival in the west he turned against his patron and employer. In the
summer of 214 he received Liu Zhang's surrender and established his
own regime at Chengdu.

In 219 the decisive victory over Xiahou Yuan established Liu Bei's
control of the Han valley, and gave justification for his claim to the
royal and then imperial title of Han. Further east, however, the
destruction of Guan Yu, and the failure of Liu Bei's expedition down
the Yangzi three years later, restricted the territory of his state to
Yi province, and despite its imperial pretensions Shu-Han never
recovered from those massive defeats.

When Liu Bei died in 223, his son Liu Shan was seventeen, but Zhuge
Liang acted as regent and held control of the government. He confirmed
the alliance with Wu, and in campaigns to the south during 224 and 225
he established control of the territory and people as far as the Dian
Lake in present-day Yunnan. In 227 he turned his attention to the
north: from Hanzhong he launched a series of attacks across the Qin
Ling range, and he encouraged defection among the Wei commanders to
the west, in present Hubei. The renegade Meng Ta, however, was quickly
destroyed by the Wei general Sima Yi, and Zhuge Liang was not able to
establish a position. In 229 he did acquire the territory of Wudu
commandery, the southern part of present-day Gansu on the upper Han
valley, and in 233 he embarked on a renewed attempt to break the line
of the mountain barrier. He was, however, successfully opposed by Sima
Yi, and he died in the following year.

After a short period of intrigue and confusion, Zhuge Liang's position
as commander-in-chief and head of government was taken by Jiang Wan.
Like Zhuge Liang, Jiang Wan had his headquarters in Hanzhong, on the
frontier against Wei, and the central administration at Chengdu was
maintained by a secondary office. In 244, Jiang Wan became ill and
left active service, and at his death in 246 Liu Shan, now forty years
old, took formal authority at the capital. Despite his maturity Liu
Shan was an unimpressive ruler. He was accused, probably correctly, of
being more interested in his harem and his personal pleasures than in
the responsibilities of government, and he gave excessive power to his
favourite Chen Zhi and the eunuch Huang Hao.

Though he planned aggressive action, Jiang Wan had never presented Wei
with a serious threat. His position as chief minister on the frontier
was taken by Fei Yi, and when Fei Yi was assassinated by a renegade
from Wei in 251 command in the north was given to the energetic
general Jiang Wei. For the strategists of Shu-Han, an attack from
Hanzhong eastwards down the river against present-day Henan, though
tempting, was put out of consideration by the difficulty of retreat
upstream if the invasion should be defeated. As a result, for the next
ten years, Jiang Wei sought to break the line of the Qin Ling ranges,
primarily through alliance with the non-Chinese Qiang. The men of Wei,
however, consolidated their power with a program of agricultural
garrisons, while the energies and morale of the people of Shu-Han were
exhausted by the years of failure.

In the 260s, after the Sima family had established control of the
government of Wei, they planned the attack on Shu-Han. In the autumn
of 263 they captured the passes into Hanzhong, and while one army held
Jiang Wei in the northwest, the general Deng Ai went forward against
Chengdu. In the winter, after victory in one pitched battle, he
received the surrender of Liu Shan. There was a brief period of
intrigue and confusion as Deng Ai was dismissed and then assassinated,
while Jiang Wei and a rebel commander of Wei, Zhong Hui, sought to
establish an independent position, but the plotters were killed, and
in the summer of 264 Liu Shan was received into honoured exile at
Luoyang.

At the time of the surrender the population of Shu-Han was reported as
280,000 households, 940,000 individuals, 40,000 officials, and 102,000
men under arms. The registered population of Yi province under Later
Han had been seven and a quarter million, and even the three
commanderies about Chengdu had numbered more than 575,000 households
with two and a quarter million individuals. In the Treatise of
Geography of Jin shu, which preserves the figures for tax assessment
some twenty years later, the population of the territory is just over
300,000 households. This is compatible with the record of Shu-Han, and
clearly indicates a quota system of taxation, rather than a decline in
the number of people physically inhabiting the province. No government
of this time was able to maintain the same level of control as had the
local administrators of Han, and the nominal losses of population were
much the same over all the divided empire.

On the other hand, though the state of Wu had made some attempt to
establish a structure of government which might echo the traditions of
Han, Shu-Han appears to have had no more than the most basic civil
administration. After the death of Zhuge Liang, the office of
Chancellor was ended. Jiang Wan held his senior position with the
title Marshal of State, and Fei Yi, head of government at Chengdu, was
General-in-Chief, Intendant of the Secretariat and Governor of Yi
province. Soon after Jiang Wan's death, Fei Yi moved to campaign
headquarters in Hanzhong, and Jiang Wei, also with command in the
north, became Intendant of the Secretariat. So the senior officials of
the state held military titles, and were regularly engaged in war,
while civilian matters at Chengdu were in the hands of Liu Shan and
his favourites. In such circumstances, the administration of Shu-Han
was that of a warlord regime, with emphasis on the recruitment and
supply of troops and on the personal interests of the chieftain. There
were, of course, clerical offices to support the work, but it was not
a government for long-term planning and development.

One effect of this limitation may be seen in the relationship of the
government of Shu-Han with the lands of the south. When Liu Bei seized
power at Chengdu in 214, he established the divisional office of
Laixiang to administer the southern part of his territory, and the
campaigns of Zhuge Liang of the mid-220s destroyed the non-Chinese
alliance led by Meng Huo. It should be observed, however, that the
settlement imposed on the defeated tribes by Zhuge Liang left the
people under continuing control by their native leaders, and confirmed
that power with seals and other emblems of authority. In formal terms,
they were subjects of Shu-Han, but the records refer to several later
rebellions in the southern commanderies, and although the people were
brought under control without great difficulty, they did not add
notably to the resources of the state.

In this respect, we may contrast the policy of Shu-Han with that of
Wu, where conquest of new territory was followed by firm colonisation
and the establishment of new units for local control. While the number
of counties in the territory of Wu had doubled during the century and
a half between the census of Later Han and the register of Jin, in the
territory of Shu-Han there was a net gain of just twenty percent, and
there was no program of development.

In sum, once Sun Quan had confirmed his hold on the middle Yangzi, the
only areas of expansion for Shu-Han lay to the north and the south.
Southwards, the government of Zhuge Liang and his successors contented
themselves with a general authority, but they did not develop the
human and material resources they had acquired. Instead, they
concentrated their efforts upon the north and exhausted their limited
strength in futile aggression. Shu-Han was founded as a warlord
enterprise in a provincial state, and it never became anything more.

Wei and the Sima family

In comparison with Shu-Han, with Wu and with the Gongsun family of the
northeast, the state of Wei established by Cao Cao must be regarded as
effective successor to the fallen empire of Han. Apart from the
formality of the abdication by Emperor Xian to Cao Pi in 220, Wei
controlled the heart-lands of China and some seventy per cent of the
formerly registered population. The achievement, of course, has been
recognised by traditional historians, but there has also been long
debate on the reasons for the failure of Wei to reunite the whole of
the empire, and this has led to criticism of the state and its rulers,
either for lack of enterprise or for lack of moral virtue. We have
noted, however, that the increased population of China south of the
Yangzi, and the military competence of the government of Sun Quan,
made the conquest of that territory extremely difficult - and while
Shu-Han in the west remained independent, the northern regime was
faced with two substantial opponents who could not be eliminated
quickly. Indeed, rather than criticising Cao Cao for not restoring the
whole empire of Han, one should admire his achievement in successfully
re-establishing government in the north.

On all evidence, the break-down of imperial authority at the end of
the second century AD was far more serious than it had been at the
beginning of the first. At the simplest level of calculation, the
earlier period of full civil war lasted only fifteen years, from the
rebellion against Wang Mang in 22 to Emperor Guangwu's defeat of his
last major enemy, Gongsun Shu in 36. In contrast, by 207, when Cao Cao
had established full dominance over the Yellow plain, the structure of
Han government had disappeared, the empire had been devastated by
twenty years of turmoil, and later events would prove that control of
central China no longer guaranteed control of the periphery.

This political and military perspective partly concealed an important
change in Chinese society. At the beginning of Later Han, the
reunification of the empire had depended to some extent upon the
support which Emperor Guangwu obtained from leading clans and local
families, and the power of the government had been substantially
limited by its political debts. In the two hundred years which
followed, gentry control in the countryside grew steadily, with land,
tenants, clients and armed retainers, and the authority of the court
and the capital became proportionately weaker. The collapse of
authority in civil war confirmed this development, and presented both
the opportunity and the necessity for non-official organisations for
self-protection.

The problem facing Cao Cao was twofold: on the one hand, there were
great numbers of refugees, driven from their homes by war and famine,
and at the same time there were numerous local organisations which had
taken responsibility for many of the people, and which offered a
low-level competition for legitimacy and power. Many of these
organisations, often described as "bandits" or "rebels" were formed
amongst the peasants, and they sometimes took the form of clan
groupings or religious associations. The great majority of
dispossessed or uncertain people, however, gathered about some local
magnate, and through this pattern of commutation the power of gentry
clans, which had already been great under Later Han, came to dominate
the local economy, society and administration. The restoration of full
imperial power required not merely victory in war, but also the
re-establishment or replacement of a system of government which had
been growing steadily less effective for some two hundred years.

At an early stage of the civil war, about 196, Cao Cao established a
number of "agricultural garrisons" (tuntian) in the neighbourhood of
Xu city, his chief headquarters. There was arable land nearby which
had been abandoned by refugees and was available to the government,
and it was sensible and appropriate that surplus people should be
allocated the empty fields. The distinctive point about the new
system, however, was that the farmers maintained a direct relationship
with the government, that they were granted supplies and material
assistance, and that they returned a regular share of produce to the
imperial granaries and treasury.

Traditionally, under the Han dynasty, a tax had been levied upon each
subject's land-holding, while other government exactions, such as poll
tax, civil corvee and military conscription or payment for
substitutes, placed a heavy burden on the peasant farmer. The
opportunities for corruption and confusion, and for false reporting
and evasion, were very great, particularly since the bureaucrats
responsible for the collection of the revenues tended to come from the
land-owning families themselves. The new agricultural garrisons,
through concentration upon sharing the yield, removed the need for
surveys of the quantity and quality of the land, and by placing the
peasants under the direct control of the government the system
eliminated the influences of private interest.

A good deal of debate took place before this policy on sharing
production was determined. Since the government was providing the land
and farming equipment, notably including oxen for the heavy work of
ploughing, there were many who argued that the farmers should be
required to pay a fixed rental, regardless of the value of the crop.
Cao Cao's adviser Zao Zhi, however, argued that the government levy
should be taken as a percentage of the yield, not as a fixed sum: the
share-cropping system provided a steady incentive towards higher
production, and although a fixed sum might appear more likely to
produce a guaranteed return, it would still be necessary to reduce
payments in time of poor harvest. This was agreed, and it appears that
the government received 50% of the annual yield from the tenant of a
garrison, or 60% when the oxen used were owned by the state.

The first garrisons were set up under the administration of Ren Jun,
close adviser to Cao Cao, who was appointed Commissioner for
Agriculture with authority comparable to that of the head of a
commandery, and the system was extended through many areas of Cao
Cao's control. It was not, however, universally applied, and not all
agricultural garrisons were set up directly by the central government.
North of the Yellow River, it appears that there was regular household
and land tax, with agricultural garrisons in only a few places of
particular local need, and in the region of the Huai River the local
commander Liu Fu organised a number of settlements which appear to
have remained under the supervision of his office.

Though earlier agricultural garrisons had been set up primarily for
military purposes - and those established by Liu Fu were indeed
established to maintain the frontier against Wu - Cao Cao's system was
designed as much for the value of its civilian production as for
military defence. Tenants of the garrisons were naturally expected to
be able to protect themselves in time of emergency, and on occasion
they could take part in major work on dams and canals, but they were
not conscripted for general corvee labour, nor for military service -
their function was to produce food, the sinews of war, and they were
protected from any interference with that duty.

As a means of physical and political resettlement, the agricultural
garrisons were remarkably successful, for they confirmed Cao Cao's
control of the ground and gave the migrant peasants a new commitment
to the regime which had sponsored them. Economically, the system
deployed the resources of land and people on terms which provided
regular supplies for government and the army. Comparatively speaking,
however, the production of the agricultural garrisons was only a
fraction of the resources of the Cao Cao's territory, and it was still
necessary for the new regime to establish formal links of authority
and service with the many local centres of power. It was in these
circumstances that Cao Cao began the system of appointments by Nine
Ranks and Categories (jiupin) and when Cao Pi succeeded his father in
220, the structure was established in the state of Wei.

Traditionally under Han, recruitment into the imperial service had
been through recommendation of a candidate, generally followed by a
period of probation at the capital, and then appointment to
substantive office. The majority of recommendations had been made in
the form of "Filial and Incorrupt" (xiaolian) by the administration of
the commandery to which the candidate belonged. Theoretically, the
judgement of a nominee's worth was made on the basis of his local
reputation, confirmed where appropriate by supervision at court. By
the end of Han, however, through their natural alliance with peers and
colleagues in local government, selection had come largely into the
hands of the local gentry, and the program was rather a source of
influence for great families than a reliable means of obtaining
servants for the state. Under the stress of civil war, moreover, the
system had broken down entirely, and Cao Cao was compelled to seek
some other means to recruit men of ability without encouraging the
existing tendencies to local authority and separatism.

Formally, the new system echoed the old principles of choice based
upon local reputation, "nomination from the district and selection by
the village", and those who were put forward had their characters
described in terms similar to those of the "pure judgements"
fashionable among scholars and gentlemen in the later years of Han.
Despite this air of legitimate tradition and honest reform, however,
such a system in practice could only confirm the opportunity for local
men of power to influence the recommendations.

To guard against self-serving, corrupt and false nominations, the
central government of Wei appointed Rectifiers to each commandery,
officials whose duty was to assess the quality of the candidates for
office, and to grade them in terms of suitability and potential. In
this respect, they carried out one of the functions of a Grand
Administrator under Han, but there were two notable differences:
firstly that these officials were specialists in such judgements,
acting as censors for local nominations and secondly that whereas in
Han times senior local officials were deliberately appointed to hold
office outside their home country, the Rectifiers were required to
supervise their own native territory. They were, however, commissioned
from the capital, and it was hoped that they would act rather as
informed agents of the state than as representatives of purely local
interests.

The judgement of the Rectifiers was expressed by allocation of each
candidate to one of nine categories, backed by a summary description
of his character. In similar fashion, all offices in the empire were
graded into nine ranks, although there was no necessary correlation
between the category of an official and the rank of his current
office. The category was rather a judgement of potential, and men of
the highest category were regarded as eligible for appointment to the
highest positions.

Though there were a number of subordinates to assist the Rectifiers in
their work, and some senior officials with different titles were
established at provincial level, there were frequent complaints that
the officers were over-extended, so they could not make full
investigation of the multitude of candidates. Predictably, there were
also accusations of favouritism, many of them justified, and in
practice it appears that the system became the means by which men of
good family entrenched themselves in power. In a celebrated memorial
presented during the early years of Western Jin, Liu Yi criticised the
arbitrary power of these officials, claiming that:

there are no men of humble family in the highest categories, nor do
any representatives of powerful clans appear among the lower ranks.

And the modern Japanese scholar Tanigawa Michio has observed that:

it was the aristocratic stratum in the Six Dynasties which...
established itself as a ruling class. The most concrete, structural
manifestation of their institutionalization was the Nine Ranks
recruitment system for the bureaucracy.

The system had been designed to satisfy the claims of leading local
families to a role in the government, but to maintain some control
over the full exercise of their influence. In the long term, given the
power of the great clans, the attempt was doomed to failure, and the
state of Wei remained vulnerable to the ambitions of its mighty
subjects.

There was, in this respect, critical disagreement between the new
regime of the Cao family and the ambitions of other great clans in the
reconstituted empire. While men of good family looked naturally for a
continuation of the processes which had developed under Han, with
increasing autonomy for their local interests and power, Cao Cao and
his associates sought the restoration of good order through strong
central government, with laws and administration which would bring an
end to the weakness and disorder that bedevilled the last century of
Han. In summary terms, while the government of Cao Cao looked for a
"Legalist" or "Modernist" solution to the political crisis, their
leading subjects were concerned with the status and power of their
families, justified by a "Confucian", "Reformist" morality.

The authority and legitimacy of the state of Wei was based upon
success in civil war and a special relationship with the tradition of
Han. Through more than twenty years, Cao Cao developed a parallel
administration whereby he himself held nominal position as chief
servant of the dynasty, but also maintained a separate administrative
and military structure under his own command. When his son and
successor Cao Pi received the abdication of Emperor Xian of Han and
took the imperial title for himself, it was indeed generally accepted
that the Mandate of Heaven had changed, and that the power of Earth,
represented by the colour yellow, had succeeded to the Fire and red of
Han.

Besides its military strength, and the mystical authority which could
be claimed from Han, the new regime enhanced its position with the
outward signs of power and prosperity. The three chief cities, Luoyang
which had been the capital of Later Han, Xu city the residence of
Emperor Xian, and Ye city the former headquarters of Yuan Shao, now
centre of the administration of Wei, were each restored and adorned
with monuments. In 212, when his Copper Bird Terrace on the walls of
Ye city was completed, Cao Cao had his sons celebrate the occasion by
composing a rhapsody. His third son Cao Zhi, then ten years old,
wrote:

On a pleasure-tour with the brilliant ruler,

we climb the storied terrace with feelings of delight

We see all the palace stretched out below,

and we gaze upon the works of wisdom and virtue:

He has raised great gates like rugged hills,

he has floated twin turrets into the clouds,

He has built a splendid tower to reach the heavens,

he has joined flying bridges to the western walls.

We look down to the long thread of the Zhang River,

we look out to the flourishing growth of the orchards

We lift our heads to the gentle majesty of the spring breeze,

and we hear the competing cries of a hundred birds.

The heavenly work is established firm as a wall,

the wishes of our house are brought to fulfilment,

Good influence reaches all the world,

and every respect and reverence is paid to the capital

Though the hegemons of the past were magnificent,

how can they compare to your wisdom and virtue?

Cao Cao was impressed, and the theme and the author symbolize two
notable aspects of the state of Wei. Though the rhapsody is not one of
his finest works, Cao Zhi is admired as one of the greatest poets of
China. Cao Cao himself was skilled in both poetry and prose, his
eldest son and heir Cao Pi had real ability as a composer and scholar
of literature, and Cao Pi's son Cao Rui was also respected as a poet.

This succession of talented rulers, moreover, gathered and sponsored a
host of poets, writers and scholars, respected and admired in their
own time and in subsequent generations, who gave an intellectual
splendour to what might otherwise have been no more than a military
government. The details of their achievement must be analysed
elsewhere, but we may recognise that the abilities of the Cao family,
in association with such men as Wang Can and the other Masters of the
Jian'an reign period, represent a flowering of culture which is one of
the glories of early Chinese civilisation, and the leadership of the
new government was strengthened by this gathering of distinguished men
at court.

As for any state developed in such a time of crisis and continuing
tension, the structure of power at the centre of Wei was by no means
certain or secure. By good fortune, Cao Cao lived to the age of
sixty-five, and Cao Pi his eldest son, succeeded him as a mature man
of thirty-four. There had been, however, some question whether Cao
Zhi, third son of Cao Cao, might not have been named his successor,
and the second son, Cao Zhang, a competent and experienced military
commander, held some hopes for himself. One reason Cao Pi arranged to
receive the imperial title from Emperor Xian so soon after his
father's death was to confirm his position at the head of the
government.

Moreover, Cao Pi also removed his brothers and half-brothers from any
further possibility of threat or rivalry. They were swiftly despatched
to the territories of their nominal fiefs, they were kept under
constant observation, and they were transferred, demoted, or restored
in title at frequent intervals. Very occasionally, they were permitted
formal visits to the capital, but they were not allowed any place in
the government.

This firm isolation of the emperor's male relatives remained an
established policy of Wei, and it reflected the practice of Han. Cao
Pi, however, considering the troubles which had beset the imperial Liu
family through the involvement of great families of relatives by
marriage, also ordered that the empress-dowager should have no
involvement in government, and no member of the clan of an imperial
consort should hold position as a regent. The Lady Bian, dowager of
Cao Cao and mother of Cao Pi, was a former sing-song girl, the Lady
Guo, chosen Empress of Cao Pi, came of minor gentry stock and had at
one time been a servant, and the father of Cao Rui's first Empress Mao
had been a yamen runner. It seems very probable the latter two
consorts were deliberately chosen from families which could offer no
rivalry to the Cao family. The policies of exclusion, one old and one
new, removed two sources of potential disturbance from the court, but
they also deprived the imperial lineage of some prestige and political
support, and compelled the ruler to rely chiefly upon cadet branches
of the family or other clans allied through marriage to princesses.

The effect of the new system was shown in 226, when Cao Pi died at the
age of forty. His eldest son Cao Rui, twenty-two years old, came to
the throne as an adult, but four regent advisers were appointed for
him: the minister Chen Qun, the generals Cao Zhen and Cao Xiu, who
were distantly related to the imperial family, and the general Sima
Yi. In practice, the new emperor was permitted to manage affairs for
himself, but the combination of guardians reflected the balance of
influence which supported the throne. Within a few years, moreover,
Cao Zhen, Cao Xiu and Chen Qun were dead, and Sima Yi was the senior
minister and military commander of the empire.

The Sima family were a respected, old-established, and wide-ranging
family from Henei commandery. Sima Yi's elder brother Sima Lang had
joined Cao Cao early in the civil war, and Sima Yi, who first held
office at the puppet court of Han, followed him in 208 and served on
the staff of Cao Cao's headquarters. In 217 he became a member of the
suite of Cao Pi as Heir Apparent, and he was evidently a personal
friend. When Cao Pi came to the throne, Sima Yi received steadily
higher appointments, and in 224 and 225 he was left in charge of
domestic affairs while the emperor took the field against Wu.

A few months after Cao Pi's death in 226, Sima Yi took command in the
field for the first time, driving back a secondary attack of Wu
against Xiangyang, and in the following year he was given
responsibility for military affairs on the Han River. Although he was
in his late forties, and his previous experience had been civil and
administrative, he proved to be an energetic and competent general,
and during the next ten years he held command in the south against Wu
and in the west against Shu-Han.

In 238 Sima Yi was recalled from his headquarters at Chang'an to take
command of an offensive against Gongsun Yuan of Manchuria. In a swift,
powerful campaign he brushed aside Gongsun Yuan's defences on the Liao
River, captured his capital Xiangping, and exterminated the warlord
government. So the northeast was brought into the domain of Wei, and a
further series of campaigns in 244-245, under the general Guanqiu
Jian, broke the power of the non-Chinese state of Koguryo and removed
any immediate threat from that region of the frontier. The Chinese
military position in the northeast was now the strongest it had been
since the time of Emperor Wu and Former Han, and its political
authority is reflected in a series of embassies which came to the
court of Wei from the Japanese female ruler Pimiko.

In 239, at the age of thirty-five, Cao Rui died. He had no sons of his
own body, and his adopted successor was a seven-year-old boy, Cao
Fang, who was surely a close member of the imperial family, but whose
exact parentage was officially unknown. Cao Rui had replaced the Lady
Mao with a new Empress, the Lady Guo, a woman of respectable family,
but in accordance with the policy of Cao Pi her relatives were kept
from power. For a time Cao Rui contemplated a council of regency which
would be dominated by members of the imperial lineage, but he was
finally persuaded to nominate only two men: Cao Shuang, son of the
former regent Cao Zhen, and Sima Yi.

From the beginning of the joint regency, chief power at court was in
the hands of Cao Shuang. Sima Yi was given the honourable title of
Grand Tutor, but he was not encouraged to play any substantial role,
and he concentrated rather upon military enterprises. Unlike his
father and grandfather, Cao Rui had taken no part in military affairs,
Cao Fang was still too young to do so, and Cao Shuang recorded only a
single unsuccessful campaign against the frontier of Shu-Han. Sima Yi,
in contrast, was a distinguished commander, with wide support in the
army and among men of good family outside the circle of the court.

In the cultural history of China the Zhengshi reign period from 240 to
249, the time of Cao Shuang's regency, is a moment of intellectual
brilliance when the tradition of Confucianism, almost exhausted by the
sterilities of Han, was revived for a time under the influence of
Taoism and in particular by association with xuanxue, "The Study of
the Mysteries." Among the leaders of this intellectual trend were He
Yan, a close associate of Cao Shuang, and his friend Wang Bi, one of
the greatest interpreters of the Yi jing )v8g the Book of Changes.

The social attitudes and personal conduct of this group of
intellectuals and scholars, however, though fitting with the freedom
of their philosophical attitudes, did not win wide approval or
respect. He Yan, son of a concubine of Cao Cao, was elegant and
arrogant, a scholar of the Laozi, brilliant in the repartee and
dialectic of "pure conversation" (qingtan). Under Cao Shuang, as a
member of the imperial secretariat, he had considerable influence on
official appointments, and brought many of his colleagues to court. He
had a reputation, however, as a libertine, and he and his associates
were devotees of the ecstatic drug known as the Five Minerals Powder.

In many respects, the attitude of He Yan and his friends was
comparable to the ideal of "spontaneity" and going "beyond the bounds"
which was followed by their contemporaries Ruan Ji, Xi Kang and other
Sages of the Bamboo Grove. These men, of good background and great
talent, represented a movement which sought to avoid meaningless
formality, and which deliberately opposed the traditions accepted by
standard Confucianism. The attitudes of He Yan and his associates can
be readily understood in the context of the society of their time, but
their conduct was exaggerated both in reality and in the propaganda of
their enemies. In political terms, He Yan appears to have been the
only member of the group interested in substantial office, but Cao
Shuang and all the court were affected by his reputation. In the
earlier years of Wei, the literary life of the capital added lustre
and authority to the new regime. Now, in a sad reversal, the excesses
attributed to He Yan and his clique became an embarrassment, and Sima
Yi was able to present himself as the representative for men of good
family who sought Confucian reform, morality and restraint in politics
and society.

In 247 Cao Shuang and his associates introduced a number of
administrative and legal changes to enhance the central power which
they controlled. Sima Yi pretended illness and ostensibly retired from
public life, but at the beginning of 249, as the emperor and Cao
Shuang were on a visit to the dynastic tombs outside Luoyang, Sima Yi
gathered troops for a coup detat, seized the cortege and massacred Cao
Shuang, his colleagues and their kinsmen. From this time on, the state
of Wei was in the hands of the Sima family.

In 251, two years after the coup, Sima Yi died, leaving his position
to his eldest son Sima Shi, then forty years old. Sima Shi embarked on
a series of raids and campaigns against Wu and against the non-Chinese
people of the north, but he achieved no breakthrough, and by 254 the
emperor and supporters of the Cao family were threatening his
authority. Sima Shi, however, struck first, deposed Cao Fang, and set
his cousin Cao Mao on the throne in his stead.

In the following year, 255, the general Guanqiu Jian and other
supporters of the dynasty seized the city of Shouchun and asked for
help from Wu. The southerners, however, were unable to provide
assistance, and Sima Shi destroyed the rebels. Soon afterwards, on 23
March, Sima Shi died, but he was succeeded by his younger brother Sima
Zhao, and the power of the clan was not interrupted. In 257 another
general of Wei, Zhuge Tan, rebelled at Shouchun and also sought
support from the south, but the city was recaptured in the following
year and the northern hold on the line of the Huai River was
confirmed.

In 260, there was one further conspiracy to preserve the dynasty, in
which the twenty-year-old Emperor took a leading role, but it was
defeated in a short skirmish, and Cao Mao was killed in the fighting.
He was replaced by the last in the line of puppets, Cao Huan, and Sima
Zhao could now concentrate upon the conquest of Shu-Han. By 264
victory in the west was complete, and Sima Zhao took title as King of
Jin. In the autumn of the following year Sima Zhao died, but he was
succeeded by his eldest son Sima Yan, then thirty years old. That
winter, on 4 February 266, in form reminiscent of Cao Pi's accession
years before, Sima Yan received the abdication of Cao Huan and took
the imperial title for himself.

So the final triumph of Wei over Shu-Han was also the occasion for the
overthrow of the Cao family and its replacement by the Jin dynasty of
Sima Yan. The victory could perhaps have come earlier, for the
northern state was always more powerful than its rivals, while
Shu-Han, after the death of Zhuge Liang, did not maintain an effective
government, and Wu also suffered dissension after the long reign of
Sun Quan. In similar fashion, however, the weakness of the central
government of Wei after the death of Cao Pi, and the conflict which
accompanied the rise to power of Sima Yi and his family, prevented the
government from taking proper advantage of the disorder in its rivals'
camp.

Even before the conquest of Shu-Han, however, the record of Wei was
impressive. In the northeast, Cao Cao had broken the Wuhuan
confederacy, Sima Yi conquered Gongsun Yuan, and Guanqiu Jian
destroyed Koguryo and extended Chinese authority well beyond the
frontier. In the west, Cao Cao had settled the Wei River valley by his
victory at Huayin, Cao Pi received embassies from central Asia and
re-established some form of protectorate, and Xu Miao the Inspector of
Liang province confirmed control in the region south of the Ordos.

The restoration of imperial frontiers along the north, however, was
limited by weaknesses in the Chinese position which had developed
earlier, and by a natural lack of confidence on the part of the
central government in the distance over which it could exercise
control. In this respect, though Gongsun Yuan in Manchuria had
established considerable authority beyond the frontiers of Later Han,
and the campaigns of Guanqiu Jian destroyed the power of Koguryo, Sima
Yi did not build upon that achievement, but encouraged and enforced
the withdrawal of Chinese settlers. The military campaigns in the
northeast had been pursued with energy, but the net result was a
vacuum on the frontier, with opportunity for non-Chinese peoples,
notably the Murong clan of the Xianbi, to develop an independent
position.

More generally across the north, rebellion, warfare, raiding and a
resultant emigration had removed great expanses of territory from the
control of Later Han, and Cao Cao and his successors were compelled to
accept the realities of the situation. Cao Cao brought the last Shanyu
of the Southern Xiongnu as a hostage to his court, and established a
notional administration of five divisions for those Xiongnu who
acknowledged Chinese suzerainty. There was, however, no attempt to
restore a Chinese presence on the ground, and the government of Wei
had effectively abandoned all claim to the region beyond the Ordos and
the Sanggan River. By good fortune for China, neither the Xiongnu nor
the Xianbi, who now competed with them for dominance in the steppe,
were sufficiently well organised to offer any immediate threat, and
they were hampered by their own confusions and by some well-placed
Chinese intrigue. The lack of a strong imperial position, however,
left the several groups and tribes largely free to develop their own
interests and power for the future.

Nonetheless, in formal terms the government of Wei had been remarkably
successful, and the re-establishment of authority in the north laid
firm foundations for the conquest of Shu-Han and Wu. The full
unification, however, was achieved by the Sima family, and apart from
arguments of loyalty and legitimacy, their reward was not
inappropriate. Cao Cao and his son had obtained their authority from a
combination of military ability and a splendid state, but after the
early death of Cao Pi, Cao Rui had not taken firm command of the army.
For a dynasty of marginal lineage, still close to its military
origins, this was already a risk, and the suspicions of other clans
for any tendency to limit their local power were only enhanced as the
government sought to demonstrate authority through display rather than
reality. In the end, the leaders of the political community were
prepared to support the virtues and achievement of Sima Yi and his
sons, men whom they could identify with their own background and
interests, against an imperial family perceived increasingly as being
of poor character and lineage, lacking the true prestige of
government, and without sympathy for the real leaders of the
community. The new regime of Jin would reflect their interests far
better.

PART 3: The Empire of Western Jin (265-317)

The Unification of China (265-280)

When Sima Yan received the abdication of Cao Huan and proclaimed his
own empire of Jin, the formal ceremony was merely the culmination of a
process by which his family had seized control of the affairs of the
state of Wei. Sima Yan's accession followed closely upon the
triumphant conquest of Shu-Han, while the court of Wu was in turmoil
and faced rebellion in the far south. With apparently overwhelming
strength, and the energy of a new regime, there was reason to expect
that the power of Jin would be swiftly turned against the south of the
Yangzi and the unification of the Chinese world would soon be
completed. In fact, however, Sima Yan and his advisers were uncertain
of their position, and they were reluctant to embark upon another
great campaign.

The policies and structure of Jin reflected the origins of the Sima
family power and the convictions with which they had seized it. The
Sima had obtained support because they were seen as representatives of
the great clans against the Cao family, and it is fair to assume that
Sima Yi and his successors believed their position was correct and
honourable. Though the political opponents of the imperial government
of Wei sought their own interests, they identified those interests
with a true morality, and they regarded themselves as men of
traditional "Confucian" virtue, contending against an authoritarian
centralism identified with "Legalist" principles. In this respect one
may discern a renewal of the debate, identified by Loewe for the Han
period, between "Reformist" and "Modernist" approaches to imperial
government, and the policies of the Sima reflected a concern for a
structure of government and society which would give proper respect to
men of quality.

So the Sima, unlike their predecessors the Liu and the Cao, were
committed to a position as chief amongst other noble clans, and by
both politics and philosophy they were reluctant to claim the full
authority of the imperial throne.

On the other hand, it was still necessary to run a government, and
Sima Yi, Sima Shi, Sima Zhao, and Sima Yan had, each in turn, showed a
capacity for firm action. Moreover, in contrast to the policies of Han
and Wei, since the rulers of Jin regarded the state as an extension of
their family, they had no hesitation in relying upon their brothers
and cousins. The day after he took the imperial title, Sima Yan
enfeoffed twenty-seven of his relatives as princes, and these princes
were maintained in positions of power. Two of the eight senior
ministers were members of the imperial clan, several princes served as
Area Commanders and provincial Inspectors, with substantial local
authority, and all were given responsibility for the administration of
their fiefs. The Wei dynasty of the Cao had fallen into alien hands
because the emperors lacked the support of their own relatives, but
the Sima had gained their position through appointments granted within
the family, and the Jin dynasty would not be so defenceless.

At the same time, however, if the Sima were prepared to rely so
heavily upon relationship and personal loyalty, it was difficult for
the emperor to enforce the authority which had been claimed by the
earlier dynasties. The Han dynasty, moreover, had developed its
legitimacy over centuries, and the Wei had acquired their power
through conquest, but although Sima Yi and his relatives had played a
notable role in the military affairs of the state, their main route to
the throne had been through political intrigue and coups d''etat. As a
result, the power of the Jin government was restricted, and for some
years there remained a sense of uncertainty regarding its competence
and its right to rule.

Sima Yan evidently felt he could not afford to risk an immediate
attack on Wu, for the consequences of a set-back or defeat could have
been disastrous for his prestige and even for his new regime. Though
Jin now controlled the Sichuan basin, the years of bitter conflict
against Shu-Han, and the hostility that remained among the defeated
enemy, meant the resources of that region could hardly be mobilised
quickly, and the strategic defences of Wu along the Yangzi appeared
secure.

There was trouble, moreover, with the non-Chinese people of the
frontier, particularly in the northwest between the Wei River and the
Ordos. Years earlier, when the Wei general Deng Ai was engaged in the
Wei valley, he had forced the surrender of a group of Xianbi and
brought them into Qin province, newly-established on the upper Wei. By
the late 260s, however, under the leadership of the chieftain Jifu
Shujineng, these immigrants were causing trouble. A special command
was set up in 269, but in the following year a local Chinese army was
destroyed, and another shared its fate in 271. In response to this
sign of weakness the Xiongnu leader Liu Meng rebelled and raided the
territory further north, and although he was killed in 272 the unrest
remained. Eventually, in 279, when Jifu Shujineng was killed in
battle, the remainder of the Xianbi surrendered and the region was
restored once again to some form of control.

By this time, the state of Jin was sufficiently well established for a
serious attack against the south. There had been no substantial
break-through on the line of the Yangzi, but the government of Wu was
consistently on the defensive, and Sun Hao was losing both support and
confidence. There was still uncertainty among the advisers of Sima
Yan, but the forward policy had long been argued by the senior general
Yang Hu, commander on the Han River, and the project was taken up by
his successor Du Yu and the minister Zhang Hua.

The essence of the plan was to outflank the position of Wu by an
invasion from Sichuan. While Sima Zhou led a direct attack southwards,
Wang Jun the Inspector of Yi province prepared a great fleet and
sailed through the Yangzi Gorges, breaking the river barriers and
opening the way for the regular troops of Jin to advance down the Han
and across the Huai. The campaign began in the spring of 280, and by
the third month the combined forces of the invaders were at the walls
of Jianye. On 1 May 280, deserted by his last troops, Sun Hao came to
the camp of Wang Jun and handed over his seals and insignia to Sima
Zhou.

Settlement of the empire (280-290)

In 264, at the time of the conquest of Shu-Han, a decree of the
government of Wei under the control of Sima Zhao abolished the
separate administration of government agricultural garrisons "in order
to equalise the corvee services". The officials in charge were
transferred to the regular hierarchy of commanderies and counties, and
the court of Jin confirmed the policy two years later.

This pair of edicts did not eliminate all agricultural garrisons, but
it did represent a reduction in central control over those substantial
assets of labour and land, and the change reflects a weakening of the
government's position against the powerful families to whom the Sima
owed their accession to the throne. There is considerable debate on
the manner in which the nature and the function of the garrisons had
been subverted, whether by the encroachment of local gentry and
officials who took the people and the land under their own control, or
by the excessive demands made upon the colonists by competing local
and central interests, but there is no doubt that the centralising
policies of the early state of Wei, expressed particularly through
government access to the special resources of the garrisons, were now
largely abandoned. Because of their contribution to military
operations, the garrisons were maintained in form during the next few
years, but they held only a limited role in the future economy of the
state. After the conquest of Wu, when the major need for military
expenditure and energy was passed, the system of agricultural
garrisons was subsumed into the general land system of the empire.

As on other occasions in Chinese history, the reunification of the
empire left the victorious government with serious problems of
disarmament and reconstruction. The situation had not been so urgent
at the time of the conquest of Shu-Han, for there still remained the
rival and powerful state of Wu, and surplus troops could be
transferred to serve on that front. In 280, however, apart from the
general defence of the north, there was no need for more than local
garrisons, and there remained a great number of soldiers and their
families, many of them maintained in service for generations, who
should now be settled into productive work. There was room for
resettlement along the old frontier with Wu, between the Huai River
and the Yangzi and on the lower reaches of the Han, there were other
regions which had not been fully occupied or exploited in the years of
war, and abolition of the agricultural garrisons allowed a
re-assessment of their land.

In these circumstances, the government of Jin established a system of
land allocation (ketian), based upon the entitlement of each
individual in the farming community. The basic unit was fifty mou,
which was the amount allocated to a "regular" male, aged between 16
and 60 years. A "secondary" male, aged between 13 and 15 or 61 and 65,
received half that amount, and a regular female received twenty mou.
Those older or younger received no allocation. Though it is unlikely
the system could have been maintained on a regular basis, it served as
the formal basis for resettlement and reconstruction of the
countryside in the years after the unification of the empire.

As corollary to the allocation of land, and reflecting a policy
established by Cao Cao, founder of Wei, taxes were levied on each
household: one which was headed by a regular male was required to pay
three pi of silk and three jin of silk floss, and one which was headed
by a female or secondary male paid half that amount. In this regard,
an allocation of tax against each household was markedly easier to
administer than the Han system based upon land or the poll-tax, for it
did not require such a detailed survey or census and the assessment in
kind reflects a continued decline of the use of coinage.

There had been currency and inflation problems throughout Later Han,
but when the government of Dong Zhuo replaced the traditional wushu
coinage with smaller units at the beginning of the civil war, it
brought a collapse of the money economy. Cao Cao and his son Cao Pi
both attempted to restore the currency, but in 221 the government of
Wei formally declared that grain and silk should be the official means
of exchange. Though the wushu coins were later revived again, and were
maintained in circulation by the government of Jin, the official
economy still relied upon commodity exchange.

One effect of the years of disturbance had been a decline in private
commerce, and a more limited pattern of trade than in the time of Han.
The great landed estates, concerned primarily with their own
self-sufficiency, concentrated economic activity into small local
areas, and numbers of people came to take service with them. In some
cases, as we have seen, these followers came voluntarily for
protection others had been called up in an officially-sponsored
conscription, and then had their allegiance transferred gradually to
their individual commander and the same process took place as the
government agricultural garrisons were broken up to the advantage of
private interests. Despite official programs for settlement, numbers
of people failed to receive any allocation of land, while others found
the protection of a powerful magnate more attractive and secure than
the risks of individual enterprise and the demands of taxation.
Throughout the countryside, individual land-owners were able to deal
with their tenants and dependents in a system of barter and exchange
of service, and it was difficult for any government agency to obtain
information or to enforce their demands. Taxation and other levies
were obtained rather by negotiation on the basis of quotas than by
formal assessment of value and obligation.

In an attempt to control this expansion of great land-holdings and
their dependences, the imperial administration promulgated a law of
land registration (zhantian). In theory, at least, the system provided
that each individual should register his land with the government,
paying tax on the amount involved, but receiving good title in return.
As an extension of this measure, the system sought to limit the size
of land-holdings throughout the empire, proclaiming that each male was
entitled to seventy mou and each female thirty. There appears,
however, no restriction of age or family status, so children and old
people could contribute to the legal entitlement of their family. It
has been observed that under this system a husband and wife together
would have an allowance of one hundred mou, the basic figure in the
well-field system described by Mencius. Searching for reforms to solve
the problems of the time, and observing the excessive land-holdings
and the extending power of the great families, several writers of
Later Han proposed the restoration of this ideal, and Sima Lang had
suggested the scheme to Cao Cao, founder of Wei, without success.
Given the interests and strength of the opposition, a policy of equal
distribution had not been practicable in the past, and it was all the
less so now.

Unlike the ketian, which probably represented a real program of
allocation, usefully carried out in some regions, the zhantian was no
more than an attempt to establish the principle that each person was
entitled to registered possession of a certain amount of land, and any
excess was subject to ultimate control and possible confiscation. The
system was not intended for immediate operation, but represented a
policy which might be enforced at some later time.

Even this, however, was optimistic, for the government was compelled
to accept the right of nobles and officials to hold land in addition
to the regular allocation and, most importantly, there was no way to
control the numbers of client families who had attached themselves or
had been taken into service by powerful clans. In partial recognition
of the situation, the Jin allowed privileged and official families to
"protect" a limited number of retainers and tenants. As with the land
registration, the government evidently hoped that if it gave formal
recognition to the existence of these clients it would thereby
establish some principle of authority, and the situation could be
brought under control later. Given the political support which the
Sima family required from the great clans, however, and considering
the fact that the officials administering the restrictions were
themselves either members of such families or readily intimidated by
their local power, there was never great likelihood that the imperial
government would be able to enforce its writ against the wishes and
interests of its powerful subjects.

One may see the signs of weakness in records of population. The
Treatise of Geography in Jin shu presents only rounded and summary
figures for the numbers of households in each administrative area, no
way comparable to the two Han histories, which give figures for both
households and individuals. Moreover, where the Later Han records
about 140 A.D. have a total population for the empire of 9.7 million
households and almost fifty million individuals, the Jin figures about
280 have only 2.5 million households and sixteen million individuals,
one-fifth of the numbers under Han.

Though the years of civil war had certainly taken a toll in the
heart-land of China, and brought a dramatic decline along the northern
frontier, we have also observed the remarkable development of
colonisation in the area south of the Yangzi formerly controlled by
Wu. The population of China may have declined since the time of Later
Han, but the loss was certainly not so great as the figures would
indicate. Bielenstein has shown that the numbers of households given
by Jin shu for each commandery represent a taxation list, not a true
census. They may indeed be best understood as a series of quotas,
indicating the assessed value and obligation of each unit, with no
more than incidental relationship to the true population in each area.
As to the numbers of individuals, we have seen how the records of the
surrendered states of Shu-Han and Wu present far lower figures than
those of the same area recorded by Later Han, and the total given by
Jin shu follows the same pattern. It must be assumed that these
reported the people under direct control of the administration for
corvee or conscription, while the remainder of the population
contrived to avoid such levies, either by keeping at a physical
distance from government agencies or, very frequently, by sheltering
under the protection of great families. In practice, the governments
of the rival states, and the empire of Jin which succeeded them, had
only limited access to the resources which they nominally controlled.
The problem, moreover, was not just a question of administrative
energy and competence, for the growth of economic and political power
among the landed families, already established during Later Han, had
accelerated in the years of turmoil, and there was now no meaningful
machinery by which a government might restore the authority of the old
empire.

In these circumstances, unable to establish full control over the
empire, the Jin were compelled to make use of their family
connections. During the years of conflict, contending warlords and
governments had roughly maintained the Han structure of local
administration, based upon provinces, commanderies and counties.
Because of the threat of mutiny and separatism, Inspectors rather than
Governors had been appointed, and there had been varying policies and
some debate on the granting of military responsibilities. From
practice during the civil wars and under Wei, confirmed by Jin, a new
pattern was developed whereby Inspectors were appointed primarily as
civil officials, but another hierarchy, that of Area Commanders, was
appointed above them.

Classed in the second of the Nine Ranks, the same as ministers at
court and generals of the army, Area Commanders had full military
power within their territory, and their authority was dominant in the
empire outside the capital. Moreover, in a clear demonstration of
faith in family, the government of Jin entrusted members of the
imperial Sima clan with a substantial number of these appointments,
particularly along the northern frontier and in the North China plain.
By contrast, the competent official Zhang Hua was removed from his
post in You province of the northeast because of suspicion about his
loyalty.

So the government of China reunited under Sima Yan was still weak and
ineffective in comparison with Han. It did not succeed in establishing
control over its most powerful subjects, and on the other hand, as
time passed, the generation of leaders who had given a personal
loyalty to Sima Yan and his predecessors during the years of their
rise to power gradually died out. To maintain its position, the court
relied upon members of the imperial house who were established as
long-term rulers with military power over substantial territories
across the empire. It was a policy which had often been urged by
scholars of the Confucian tradition, but it had been consistently
rejected by Qin, Han and Wei. The Sima family of Jin now put it to the
test.

Empress Jia and the eight princes (290-306)

Sima Yan, Emperor Wu of Jin, died on 16 May 290 at the age of
fifty-five, and he was succeeded by his thirty-year-old son Sima
Zhong, later known as Emperor Hui.

Sima Zhong had been appointed Heir Apparent in 267, and in 272 he was
married to the Lady Jia Nanfeng, daughter of the minister Jia Chong,
an old supporter of the Sima family who had played a leading role in
the fighting against Cao Mao in 260. Though there was a general
anxiety, from increasing evidence, that Sima Zhong was mentally
disabled and unfit to rule, Sima Yan maintained him as his heir and
accepted the alliance with the Jia family.

On this vital question, Sima Yan is said to have accepted the
persuasions of his first empress the Lady Yang Yan, but the decision
was not unreasonable. As the Lady Yang observed, to discard the senior
son, even when he was not the most suitable, would open debate on
other candidates, and this could easily develop into a general
struggle for power. Sima Zhong, moreover, now had a son of his own,
Sima Yu, born of the Lady Xie, one of Sima Yan's own concubines who
had obtained his favour. In 290, Sima Yu was thirteen, and he was a
young man of outstanding quality.

Earlier, when the Empress Yang Yan was on her deathbed, she
recommended that her cousin Yang Zhi should succeed her, and Yang Jun,
father of the Lady Yang Zhi, acquired great influence with the
Emperor. In his own last illness, Sima Yan sought to establish an
interim administration to guide the dynasty until Sima Yu could take
substantive power. He had an edict prepared that his senior uncle Sima
Liang, son of Sima Yi by a concubine, should become the regent head of
government jointly with Yang Jun, and he sent three of his younger
sons into the provinces as area commanders: Sima Wei, was in Jing
province, Sima Yun was in Yang, and Sima Jian was in the northwest.
Military control of the provinces was thus almost entirely in the
hands of the Sima family: Sima Wei, Sima Yun and Sima Jian controlled
the south of the Yangzi and the northwest, the northern part of the
North China plain was held by Sima Lun, also a son of Sima Yi by a
concubine, and the territories south of the Yellow River were governed
by Sima Lun's brother Sima Yong and his nephew Sima Huang.

By accepting two empresses from the Yang clan, Sima Yan had
established a powerful group of relatives by marriage, and he was also
concerned about the ambitions of the Jia family. He evidently
believed, however, that the authority he had granted Sima Liang, and
the local powers of the princes, would be sufficient to ensure the
position of the imperial house. In fact, his death brought immediate
conflict.

It was the Yang family that took the initiative. With the support of
his daughter the Empress, Yang Jun suppressed the edict granting
regent's authority to Sima Liang, and after Sima Yan died he took that
power for himself. In fear of Yang Jun, Sima Liang made no effective
response to the challenge, but fled from the capital and took up the
position he had held earlier, as Area Commander in Yu province, based
upon Xuchang. The Empress Jia, however, held no such inhibitions: on
23 April 291 she organised a coup, with palace guards under her own
command, to destroy Yang Jun, his family and their supporters. The
Empress-Dowager Yang was deposed, and Sima Liang and the senior
official Wei Guan were invited to take over the reins of government.

Thus far, the Empress Jia could claim to have been acting in
accordance with the wishes of her late father-in-law. The situation
was confused, however, by Sima Wei, who returned from his appointment
in Jing province and sought a role in the politics of the capital.
With intrigue against his elder kinsman Sima Liang, he obtained
approval from the Empress to remove him and Wei Guan, and on 25 July
291, just three months after their appointment, the two men were
assassinated. Almost immediately afterwards, on the advice of her
minister Zhang Hua, the Empress Jia had Sima Wei arrested and executed
on the charge of forging an imperial edict.

With this last twist of treachery, the Empress Jia had gained full
control of the capital, and for the next several years the highest
positions at court were in the hands of her family and their
supporters. For a time Sima Yong, recalled from the northwest, was
given formal charge of the secretariat, but he had no real authority
and in 296 he returned to his former territory. General administration
was maintained by the veteran Zhang Hua and the youthful Pei Wei,
while the empress' nephew Jia Mi held considerable influence at court
and was a noted patron of leading men of letters.

In many respects the period of Jia family dominance resembled the
occasions in Han when consort families had acquired similar power over
the government, and though the regime has been described as a
usurpation, it was not incompetent. There were substantial problems on
the frontiers, but they were coped with, and despite the military
potential of their local powers the Sima princes appear to have
accepted the destruction of Sima Liang and Sima Wei, and the somewhat
cavalier treatment of Sima Yong, without great concern and certainly
without taking action. In fact, the struggles at the capital had
little effect upon arrangements in the provinces provided that the
imperial title remained in proper hands.

The situation was changed, however, dramatically and fatally, when the
Empress decided to remove Sima Yu from his position as Heir Apparent.
Sima Yu turned twenty in 297, and the time was approaching when he
might seek authority of his own or become the centre of a dissident
faction. He and Jia Mi, moreover, were clear enemies, and if the Heir
Apparent came to the throne the future of the Jia faction was very
uncertain. In February 300, therefore, Sima Yu was tricked into
signing a treasonous letter, and the Emperor was persuaded to dismiss
him. Three months later, on 27 April, the Empress Jia had the young
man killed.

Once again, this pattern of conduct may often be observed during Han.
A consort family which had held regency powers was always in trouble
when the true ruler came to maturity, and one side or the other would
frequently resort to intrigue and bloodshed. The unfortunate Sima Yu
had presented a comparable threat, and events followed a sad
tradition. At this point, however, unlike Han, other members of the
imperial clan were in position to defend their interests.

At the time of Sima Yu's death, the two surviving sons of Sima Yi,
Sima Yong and Sima Lun, were stationed at Luoyang. Sima Lun had
transferred from Ji to Yong province, but in 296 he was recalled to
the capital and was replaced by Sima Yong. Sima Yong, for his part,
had lately been re-appointed to formal control of the imperial
secretariat, and his place in the northwest was taken by his cousin
Sima Yung. On 7 May 300 Sima Lun and his allies seized power at the
capital. They imprisoned the Empress Jia, forcing her to commit
suicide a few days later, and they killed Jia Mi, Zhang Hua, and Pei
Wei. Sima Lun became Chancellor of State and appointed his relatives
and supporters to the leading positions.

In this respect, the policy of the Jin dynasty had been remarkably
successful. Unlike the pattern of Han, the imperial family had been
able to resist and destroy the over-ambitious consort group, and power
was now returned to the Sima family. Despite Sima Lun's seniority in
the clan, however, he was not himself popular, there was objection to
his counsellor Sun Xiu, and it was claimed that he was acting without
proper authority. In the autumn of 300, Sima Yun attempted a coup
against Sima Lun, but was killed in the skirmishing which followed.
Then, on 3 February 301, Sima Lun forced a form of abdication upon
Emperor Hui and claimed the imperial title for himself.

Despite earlier examples of such seizure of power, it was not
acceptable to usurp the throne from one's own kinsman, and in April
301 Sima Ying and Sima Yih, younger brothers of Emperor Hui, joined
forces with Sima Jiong, Area Commander at Xuchang, and came from the
east against Luoyang. They defeated Sima Lun and forced him to commit
suicide, they restored Emperor Hui to his imperial state, and then
Sima Jiong used his local military power to take over the regency.

Again, though it was one thing to run the empire as a family affair,
there was great room for disagreement as to which individual should
hold the highest position. Sima Lun's ambition had brought his
destruction, but in May 302, the death of the last of the sons of the
late Heir Apparent Sima Yu caused another dynastic crisis, for there
was now no clear successor to Emperor Hui. Sima Ying hoped for the
nomination, and he resented the dominant position taken by the more
distant relative Sima Jiong, while Sima Yung from the west also sought
a role. In complex intrigue during the last days of the Chinese year,
Sima Ying and Sima Yung involved Sima Yih in their rivalry with Sima
Jiong, but when Sima Jiong sought to destroy Sima Yih, Sima Yih turned
the tables on him and took his place at the head of government.

Sima Yih appears to have been the most competent of the princes, and
also the most popular, but disorder at the capital had already begun
to remove the authority of the central government. There was
continuing rebellion in Sichuan, increasing trouble in Henan, and
after twelve months Sima Yih was attacked from the east by Sima Ying
and from the west by Sima Yung. In an energetic campaign, Sima Yih
inflicted heavy defeat on Sima Ying's forces and held off the army of
Sima Yung commanded by Zhang Fang. Then, however, he was betrayed and
arrested in his own camp by Sima Yue, member of a cadet lineage, and
on 19 March 304 Zhang Fang had Sima Yih burnt at the stake.

On 1 May 304, with Sima Yung's approval, Sima Ying named himself as
Heir Apparent, and removed several government offices to his own
capital at Ye. Though Sima Yue still held the Emperor at Luoyang, he
felt increasing resentment at the shift of power to the new regime in
the east, and in the summer of 304 he led an army against Ye. On 9
September, at the battle of Tangyin, his troops were utterly defeated.
Emperor Hui was wounded by three arrows, his attendant Xi Shao, son of
the poet Xi Kang, was killed in front of him, and he fell into the
hands of Sima Ying.

A few weeks later, however, the general Wang Jun, who had been
appointed to command in the north by the Jia regime and was threatened
by Sima Ying, came south against Ye with an army including a
substantial contingent of non-Chinese auxiliaries. Taking the Emperor
with him, Sima Ying fled in panic to Luoyang. He was, however,
completely discredited, and power was held by Zhang Fang, who
garrisoned the capital with the most powerful army of the region. Soon
afterwards Zhang Fang brought the court west to Chang'an, where he
could also supervise his nominal superior, Sima Yung.

The new regime, however, was surrounded by enemies. The armies of Wang
Jun continued their advance, and there was an additional threat from
the Xiongnu under Liu Yuan in present-day Shanxi. From his fief
territory of Donghai, moreover, and with the aid of his brothers, Sima
Yue gathered forces to renew the challenge, and from the summer of
305, in a multitude of engagements, including the siege and capture of
Xuchang, Ye and Luoyang, he advanced towards the west. Early in 306,
in an attempt to come to terms, Sima Yung assassinated Zhang Fang, but
on 5 June 306 Chang'an was captured and sacked by an army of Wuhuan
and Xianbi under the command of Wang Jun's general Ji Hong. Emperor
Hui was returned to Luoyang, Sima Yung and Sima Ying were captured and
killed, and Sima Yue took control of the court.

Emperor Hui died on 8 January 307 - there were rumours Sima Yue had
him poisoned - and he was succeeded by his younger brother Sima Zhi,
twenty-fifth son of Sima Yan. The new emperor was not so incompetent
as his brother, but he played no part in politics and left matters to
Sima Yue. In fact, however, for all the ruthlessness with which he had
pursued his ambitions, the regime maintained by Sima Yue was little
more than a fragile facade, and the Yongjia reign period (307-312) was
a period of continued anarchy. The territory north of the Yellow River
was contested ground, there was trouble in the valley of the Huai,
Sichuan continued in rebellion, and in 308 the bandit Wang Mi from
Shandong captured Xuchang city.

The victory of Sima Yue finished the civil war, but it had ended in
exhaustion and despair. Though the brothers and cousins of the Sima
clan had indeed defended their imperial position, six years of turmoil
had produced a ferocious, meaningless record of treachery, murder and
war. The credit of the government and the imperial family was ruined,
the greater part of the imperial armies had been destroyed in the
internecine fighting, and there was no authority that might restore
the state or re-establish a position against the forces which
threatened from the north.

The peoples of the steppe and the collapse of Western Jin

Since written sources for the study of early east Asia are in Chinese,
it is not surprising that most of the history has been discussed from
a Chinese point of view. Despite this bias, however, there is ample
evidence to show that the traditional attitude towards non-Chinese
neighbours of the empire was arrogant, aggressive, short-sighted and
untrustworthy. When such people were brought under control, notably in
the south and the west, they were oppressed and exploited by the
Chinese government and its citizens, and on the northern frontier,
imperial governments sought only to force the aliens into their
tribute system. There was no concept of independence, let alone
equality of esteem, treaties were seldom made and never kept, and
trade was regarded as a means of control rather than as sensible
exchange of goods for value. It was consistent policy that any large
grouping should be divided and destroyed, but the result, often
enough, left the frontier vulnerable to a multitude of petty,
troublesome, war-leaders.

Unattractive though it may have been, that policy was successful for
much of the Han period. At the end of the first century A.D., however,
the great victory of Dou Xian over the Northern Xiongnu destroyed the
political equilibrium of the north, and the second century saw an
enfeebled Chinese government faced with a multitude of disparate
threats, from the rebellions of the Qiang people in the west to the
rise of aggressive Xianbi tribes which came to replace the federations
of the Xiongnu. In the time of Emperor Ling the Xianbi war-leader
Tanshihuai acquired general control over his people, destroyed a major
Chinese army, and sent raiding parties year after year against the
frontier.

By good fortune for the Chinese, the successors of Tanshihuai lacked
his authority, and the pirate kingdom fell into disarray after his
death in the early 180s. For a few years at the end of Han the Xianbi
leader Kebineng restored some semblance of Tanshihuai's dominion, and
was given title as an ally by Cao Pi, but Chinese diplomacy aided his
enemies, and when Kebineng was murdered in 235 the new federation also
collapsed.

Elsewhere, in the northeast Cao Cao had destroyed a Wuhuan alliance
under Tadun in 207, and he brought the Wei River valley under control
at the battle of Huayin in 211. In 216 he settled the remnant Xiongnu
in five divisions through present-day Shanxi and Shenxi, with a formal
capital under Chinese supervision at Pingyang on the Fen River, and a
hostage at Ye city for their good behaviour. Thereafter, in the region
of Manchuria the campaigns of Guanqiu Jian in 244-245 broke the
kingdom of Koguryo, and in the west the Qiang and Di peoples of the
Wei valley and present-day Gansu were generally held under control by
the contending forces of Wei and Shu-Han. When Sima Yan took his
imperial title in 265, the non-Chinese people along the northern
borders were disordered and divided.

The general strategic position, however, was far less satisfactory
than it had been before. At its greatest extent, the territory of
Later Han had included all the northern loop of the Yellow River
beyond the Ordos, and the north of present-day Shanxi and Hebei, but
during the second century disturbances amongst the Xiongnu and the
Qiang, and the attacks of the Xianbi, removed great areas from the
control of the imperial government. Cao Cao and his successors could
do no more than stabilise the situation, and as a result, under Wei
and Jin, present-day Shanxi as far south as Taiyuan and the Fen River
was occupied by groups of Xiongnu, while the Xianbi were established
in the Sanggan valley and the region of present-day Huhehot. In the
Wei valley, during the late 260s and the 270s, the Xianbi Jifu
Shujineng and the Xiongnu Liu Meng presented some embarrassment to the
new dynasty, and there was further trouble in 294 after Sima Lun, as
Area Commander, sought to establish tighter control. The rebellion
spread from the Xiongnu to the Qiang and the Di, with the Di leader Qi
Wannian claiming an imperial title in 296, and the trouble was not
suppressed until 299.

The dangers from non-Chinese occupation of the north and northwest had
not gone unnoticed. In 280, after the suppression of Liu Meng and the
defeat of Wu, the censorial official Guo Qin urged that the Xiongnu
should be expelled to the north, and in 299 the junior officer Jiang
Tong presented his "Essay on Shifting the Western Barbarians", arguing
in traditional terms that the Land Within the Passes was the heart of
the nation and the Qiang and Di should be resettled elsewhere. There
was, in fact, some attempt to drive the non-Chinese people south into
present-day Sichuan, but in practical terms the solution was
impossible: Chinese settlement in the Wei valley had been long in
decline, the economic use of the country had changed from peasant
farming to mixed agriculture and pasture, and the government was by no
means strong enough to enforce such a mass migration. Within a year,
moreover, the turmoil at court was bringing all into ruin.

At first, the quarrels of the imperial clan had been limited to the
territory about Luoyang and Chang'an. In 304, however, when Sima Ying
held the Emperor hostage at Ye, the situation changed. Wang Jun's
attack from the north was mounted with the support of Wuhuan and
Xianbi, who acquired their first taste for the plunder and slaughter
of a major Chinese city. As the invaders drew near, moreover, Sima
Ying released the Xiongnu hostage prince Liu Yuan, hoping that he
would rally his people and return to the rescue. Liu Yuan did collect
an army, but he was too late to help Sima Ying, and instead he raised
his own claim to imperial power. From a base in the Fen River valley,
relying upon his lineage from the Shanyu of the Xiongnu on one side
and from a princess of Han on the other, he declared himself first
King then Emperor of Han.

Sima Teng, younger brother of Sima Yue, had been responsible for Bing
province, but in fear of Liu Yuan he abandoned his position and left
it to the Inspector Liu Kun. Sima Teng sought to maintain himself at
Ye, but in June 307 the city was sacked and Sima Teng was killed by
the bandit Ji Sang and his associate Shi Le, a man from the Jie tribe
of the Xiongnu. Sima Yue's forces drove the invaders back a few weeks
later, and Ji Sang was killed, but Shi Le transferred his allegiance
to Liu Yuan, and by 309 their armies threatened all north China.
Though Liu Yuan died in 310, his son Liu Cong maintained the
offensive, and the death of Sima Yue early in 311 added to the
confusion within the government of Jin. On 13 July, after a massive
defeat of the defending army, Shi Le stormed Luoyang, sacked the city,
and took Sima Zhi, Emperor Huai, as a prisoner to Liu Cong's capital
at Pingyang.

With this catastrophe, the central power of Jin was ended. In the
west, Chang'an also fell to the Xiongnu but was recaptured by loyalist
forces with Qiang and Di auxiliaries. Sima Ye, eleven-year-old nephew
of Sima Zhi, was proclaimed Heir Apparent, and in 313, after Sima Zhi
had been put to death in his captivity, he ascended the throne. For a
few more years, with local support from the west and northwest of the
empire, and intervention by the loyal Liu Kun from Bing province, the
court at Chang'an maintained a tenuous existence, but the city was
steadily encircled by the forces of Liu Cong, and the defenders were
starved into submission at the end of 316. Sima Ye was also taken into
exile, and he was killed a few months later.

Elsewhere in the empire, the waning power of Jin was restricted to
Bing and You provinces in the north, and Jianye with the lands south
of the Yangzi, former territory of Wu. Sima Rui, Prince of Langye, a
great-grandson of Sima Yi, had held command at Jianye since 307. He
was attacked by Shi Le in 312, but the invaders, hampered by three
months of rain, could make no headway south of the Huai. So Jianye
became a place of refuge from the ruin of the north, and Sima Rui took
title as King of Jin in 317. The following year, after the death of
Sima Ye, he proclaimed himself Emperor, and the dynasty, now known as
Eastern Jin, was thus revived.

In Bing province, from his base at Jinyang by present-day Taiyuan, Liu
Kun obtained the aid of the Tuoba group of the Xianbi, traditional
enemies of the Xiongnu, who occupied the northern part of present-day
Shanxi and the region of Huhehot. His own position, however, was weak.
In 310 he was compelled to send his son as hostage in order to obtain
troops from his allies, and he depended increasingly upon his
relationship with the chieftain Tuoba Yilu. In 314 the two leaders
mounted a sortie to relieve Chang'an, and Tuoba Yilu was awarded the
title King of Dai. Two years later, however, as Shi Le extended his
power across the North China plain, Tuoba Yilu was assassinated and
his clansmen rejected the alliance with Jin. Liu Kun fled northeast to
the Duan group of the Xianbi, but was killed there in 318.

In somewhat similar fashion, Wang Jun in You province maintained an
alliance with the Murong group of the Xianbi, who had risen to power
in Manchuria after the defeat of Koguryo by Guanqiu Jian in the middle
of the third century, and consolidated their position through marriage
alliance with the Duan and a successfully aggressive policy towards
their neighbours the Puyo and the Yuwen Xianbi. Disconcertingly,
however, the government of Murong Hui, who had held authority among
his people since 285 and had created a orderly government with numbers
of Chinese advisers and officials, was more attractive to refugees
from central China than the regime of Wang Jun. Wang Jun had sought to
act as patron and overlord to Murong Hui, but he was deserted by his
own people and his allies, and he was taken and killed by Shi Le in
314. By contrast, in 317, Murong Hui established contact with the Jin
court at Jianye, and was awarded the title of a general and the rank
of a duke.

This last sad failure exemplifies the critical weakness of the empire:
that Chinese people should prefer an alien frontier state to the
protection of their own administrator. The destruction of the capitals
and the ruin of Western Jin was not just a matter of powerful
barbarian forces pressing against the empire it came essentially from
the irresponsible feuding that had bedevilled the imperial family
since the death of Sima Yan more than twenty years before. Where
people had looked for stability and competence, their rulers had shown
them selfishness, cruelty, and futility. Such a succession of
disorders would cut to the heart of any government, and as they were
robbed of their faith and their confidence the former subjects of the
empire turned away from those who had betrayed them.

Conclusion: Patterns of the Third Century

Looking overall at the period from the collapse of Later Han at the
end of the second century AD to the ruin of Western Jin at the
beginning of the fourth century, one may observe two major
developments of lasting importance for the history of China: the first
is the development of the Chinese position south of the Yangzi the
second is the changing economic and social structure of the Chinese
world, and the devastating effect which this had upon the basic
loyalties which had supported the traditional imperial state.

The impetus which the state of Wu gave to Chinese control over the
lands of the south has already been discussed. The situation at the
end of the second century permitted the initial establishment of a
local regime independent of the north, and then the energy of the Sun
family and their associates developed the resources of the region by
colonization into areas formerly untouched by the government of Han.
Though the rulers of Wu could not in the end survive against the
united power of the north and the west, it was through their
achievement that a base was found for the survival of a truncated
Chinese state after the fall of Western Jin.

On the second matter, while it is easy to criticise the political
weakness of Wei and the appalling instability of Western Jin, we
should recognise the degree to which the old regime of Han had been
destroyed in the first years of civil war. The warlords who struggled
for power at the beginning of the third century held their forces
together by loose bonds of personal loyalty, and even as the three new
regional states developed some formal political structures, the true
network of power was based upon family and local self-interest. In
such circumstances, one should rather admire the achievement of Cao
Cao, his rivals and successors, in creating some workable institutions
from a situation of internecine chaos, than criticise them for the
weaknesses of their constructions.

In the end, however, as the state of Western Jin fell into ruin,
anecdotes of two men, the aesthete Wang Yan and the statesman Zhang
Hua, could be presented as examples of the moral weakness that lay at
the heart of the state.

Wang Yan was one of the most brilliant men of his time, skilled in the
sophistries of pure conversation, a scholar both of diplomacy and of
xuanxue. At Luoyang in 311 he was captured by Shi Le, who asked him
about the failure of Jin. Wang Yan's answers were clear and elegant,
and Shi Le spoke with him for several days. But Wang Yan also sought
to explain how he himself had held aloof from such meanness, and those
errors and failures were no concern of his. Shi Le replied, "Your fame
extends over all the four seas, and since your youth you have occupied
high positions.... How can you claim to have taken no part in the
affairs of the world? Indeed it is your fault that the empire is
defeated and destroyed!" And so he killed him.

In similar fashion, Zhang Hua wrote an essay of warning about consort
families, but he later served the government of the Empress Jia. In
300 he was arrested and sentenced to death by Sima Lun. On the eve of
execution he sought to justify himself to one of his captors, but he
was asked to explain why he did not protest, even to death, at the
deposition of the Heir Apparent Sima Yu. Zhang Hua replied that he had
spoken against the project in open council. "And when your objections
were ignored," came the reply, "why did you not resign your office?"
Zhang Hua could make no answer.

Even if one considers the nature of their rulers, from the cruelty of
the Empress Jia to the murderous rivalries of the Eight Princes, the
conduct of these officials and their colleagues fell far short of the
model displayed by the proscribed partisans one hundred years earlier,
who were prepared to die for the principles they believed in, and they
match poorly with the personal loyalty that other men had given their
chieftains in the years of the Three Kingdoms. The problem at the
heart of Western Jin, however, was more than the limited
responsibility shown by individuals at the court, for they represented
the culmination of a process of political withdrawal, a separation
between the ruler and the chiefs of his subjects, which had been
developing since the time of Han and which was displayed very clearly
when the illusion of unity was restored by Jin.

In writing this paper, I have largely avoided such terms as
"feudalism" and "aristocracy", for I believe that such general
descriptions, unless carefully defined, carry too many implications
and allow too much room for misunderstanding. There has been debate in
recent years on the nature of Chinese society and politics in the
period between the fall of Han and rise of Sui and Tang, and two
particular problems have appeared in the course of that discussion:
there is much uncertainty and disagreement about terminology and there
is a question whether the four centuries of this period of division
can be properly treated as a whole. I can here deal only briefly with
this complex matter, but I suggest that in the time of Wei and Western
Jin the political and intellectual structure of imperial China was
faced with a crisis which arose from an economic and social situation
that was already developing during Han. There were here two separate,
contradictory factors in play. Firstly, from the time of Later Han and
increasingly during the disturbances which accompanied its fall, by a
process of commendation well recognised in the history of Western
feudalism, powerful local families gathered about them increasing
numbers of tenants and clients who sought the protection of their
leadership, and who in turn gave support to their power. Secondly,
however, because the imperial state continued to operate on the
philosophy of a direct relationship between the ruler and each of his
subjects, that private system of commendation was not extended into a
public hierarchy of feudalism. The very fact that the emperor claimed
ultimate authority over all the land, while every subject owed a
general duty of service and taxation, prevented the development of a
system which relied upon individual and hereditary contracts of
fiefdom.

From the time of Later Han, the decline of central authority brought a
fragmentation of the political and economic structure of the empire,
and the power of the great local families came from their own
resources and organisation, not from any dispensation of the imperial
authority. It is true that the governments of Han, Wei and Jin awarded
titles of nobility such as king or prince, duke and marquis, but these
reflected political relationships and favour, and did not create
political power. By contrast, the families which held authority in the
land had no such relationship with their ruler as medieval feudatories
in the West: there was no system of sub-infeudation, no contract to
exchange land for service, no legal argument about contending rights
and obligations, and no alternative authority to which a subject might
appeal. In this respect, the political and social status of those
leading families may best be compared, not to that of the great
feudatories of medieval times, but to the English gentry or the French
noblesse of early modern Europe; and even then we must observe that
there were no privileges granted by the throne of China like those
held by the noblesse in France, as, for example, exemption from
taxation by the taille.

A number of terms have been used to describe these families, whether
they were "aristocratic" or "lelite", an "oligarchy" or a "nobility".
One difficulty in analysis arises from the bias of the official
Chinese histories, which emphasise the holding of some official
position, rank or title as a sign of social status, and pay chief
attention to those individuals or kinship groups which acquire such
recognition. Naturally enough, given the records available, modern
scholarship has concentrated on families such as the Cui and the Xie,
who often held position at court and whose lineage may be traced
through the whole period of division. Nevertheless, though these
"super-lelite" clans are of interest in their own right, they are to
some extent a distraction from the broader group which I prefer to
describe as "gentry". At the upper levels of this "gentry" one may
identify the "nobility" who received titles from the ruler, and an
"aristocracy" of those few powerful clans which wielded the greatest
influence at provincial or national level. Across the empire as a
whole, however, the "gentry" were a broader class, including all those
lineage groups, down to village level, which held authority through
their control and influence over their lands, tenants, serfs and
retainers.

At a local level, power was based upon concepts which could be
identified as feudal in the West. As the gentry families enlarged
their position, however, traditional Chinese theories of government
provided no means to negotiate an effective link with this
increasingly important group of leadership within the whole community,
for it was quite inappropriate that the sovereign should enter into a
feudal contract, with reciprocal rights and duties. The gentry of
China were readily identified among the people but, unless they
happened to hold official position, they had no formal and particular
connection with the emperor and he, for his part, had no machinery to
interfere with the patron-client relationship from which they drew
their private authority.

As a result, without rights or duties on either side, the imperial
regime was faced with a simple withdrawal of interest and support by
its most powerful subjects. One faction or another might struggle for
power at court, and dynasty succeed dynasty through intrigue and
abdication, but there was no obligation upon the gentry of any level
to concern themselves with the matter, and no reason but self-interest
when they chose to do so.

For the dynasty of Western Jin, in particular, the withdrawal of
commitment by leading clans and individuals brought a crippling loss
of confidence and authority, for the weakening of the bonds of loyalty
and responsibility limited the moral force of the government, denied
it access to a high proportion of the economic resources that it
theoretically controlled, and rendered the whole imperial regime
vulnerable and unstable. At the same time, however, the changes of
society and politics brought forward a new and exciting debate on the
proper relationship of the individual with the family, with the state,
with the community, and with the world at large.

